PR2_BOUNDED_EDGE_STREAM_PLAN.md, before:

# PR-2: Bounded Edge Stream - Detailed Planning Document

## Problem Statement

The edge stream has a **pathological 16x dimension explosion**:
```
1D edge features → 16D projection → BiMamba → 1D output
```

Without bounded activation, this causes:
- Values exploding to ±infinity
- Gradient explosion/vanishing
- Required manual clamp at line 258: `edge_in = torch.clamp(edge_in, -3.0, 3.0)`

## Theoretical Foundation

### Literature Support

1. **"Searching for Activation Functions" (Ramachandran et al., 2017)**
   - Shows bounded activations (tanh, sigmoid) provide stability
   - Swish/GELU can explode without normalization

2. **"Understanding the Difficulty of Training Deep Networks" (Glorot & Bengio, 2010)**
   - Dimension changes require careful activation choice
   - Bounded activations prevent gradient issues

3. **"Fixing the Stationary Point Problem in Deep Networks" (Pennington et al., 2017)**
   - Shows tanh maintains gradient flow better than ReLU in deep networks
   - Critical for dimension-changing projections

4. **"Self-Normalizing Neural Networks" (Klambauer et al., 2017)**
   - Proves certain activation patterns lead to self-normalization
   - SELU for this purpose, but tanh + norm achieves similar effect

## Current Problem Analysis

### The 16x Explosion Path
```python
# Current implementation (UNSTABLE)
edge_feats = compute_edge_features(x)  # (B, 171, 960, 1)
edge_in_proj = nn.Linear(1, 16)  # 16x expansion!
edge_in = edge_in_proj(edge_feats)  # (B, 171, 960, 16) - UNBOUNDED
edge_in = torch.clamp(edge_in, -3, 3)  # BAND-AID

edge_mamba = BiMamba2(d_model=16)
edge_out = edge_mamba(edge_in)  # Can still explode

edge_out_proj = nn.Linear(16, 1)  # 16x contraction
edge_weights = F.softplus(edge_out_proj(edge_out))  # Finally bounded
```

### Mathematical Analysis

Without bounds, variance grows as:
```
Var(edge_in) = 16 * Var(edge_feats) * Var(W)
```

With ReLU activation and He initialization:
```
After projection: σ² → 16σ²
After Mamba (6 layers): σ² → 16^6 σ² = 16,777,216σ²
```

**Result**: Values reach ±10^6 range, causing NaN.

## Proposed Solution

### 1. Bounded Activation After Projection

Replace:
```python
edge_in = edge_in_proj(edge_flat)  # Unbounded
edge_in = torch.clamp(edge_in, -3, 3)  # Band-aid
```

With:
```python
edge_in = torch.tanh(edge_in_proj(edge_flat))  # Bounded [-1, 1]
edge_in = RMSNorm(16, eps=1e-5)(edge_in)  # Normalized
```

### 2. Improved Initialization

```python
# Current: Default initialization (too large for 16x expansion)
edge_in_proj = nn.Linear(1, 16)

# Proposed: Conservative initialization
edge_in_proj = nn.Linear(1, 16)
nn.init.normal_(edge_in_proj.weight, std=0.1)  # Much smaller
nn.init.zeros_(edge_in_proj.bias)
```

### 3. Optional: Graduated Expansion

Instead of 1→16 directly, use graduated expansion:
```python
edge_lift = nn.Sequential(
    nn.Linear(1, 4),
    nn.Tanh(),
    nn.Linear(4, 8),
    nn.Tanh(),
    nn.Linear(8, 16),
    nn.Tanh(),
    RMSNorm(16)
)
```

## Configuration Schema

```yaml
model:
  graph:
    # Edge lifting configuration
    edge_lift_activation: str  # "tanh" | "sigmoid" | "selu" | "none"
    edge_lift_norm: str  # "rmsnorm" | "layernorm" | "none"
    edge_lift_init_std: float  # 0.1 (conservative)

    # Edge dimension
    edge_d_model: int  # 16 (current) | 8 (memory-efficient)

    # Graduated expansion
    edge_graduated_expansion: bool  # false (default) | true
    edge_expansion_stages: list  # [1, 4, 8, 16] if graduated

    # Edge Mamba config
    edge_mamba_layers: int  # 2 (current)
    edge_mamba_d_state: int  # 8 (current)
```

## Mathematical Guarantees

### With Tanh Activation
```
Given: x ∈ [-∞, +∞]
After tanh: y ∈ [-1, +1]
After RMSNorm: y' has unit RMS
→ Bounded regardless of input magnitude
```

### Gradient Flow
```
tanh'(x) = 1 - tanh²(x) ∈ (0, 1]
Maximum at x=0: tanh'(0) = 1
Minimum as x→±∞: tanh'(±∞) → 0
```

With RMSNorm, gradients are rescaled to prevent vanishing.

## Impact Analysis

### Clamps That Become Redundant
```python
# Can remove after PR-2:
detector.py:250: edge_feats = torch.clamp(edge_feats, -0.99, 0.99)
detector.py:258: edge_in = torch.clamp(edge_in, -3.0, 3.0)

# Edge features module:
edge_features.py:77: x_norm = torch.clamp(x_norm, -10.0, 10.0)
```

### Expected Improvements
- Edge stream variance: Unbounded → O(1)
- Gradient variance in edge path: 100+ → <5
- Edge Mamba stability: Requires clamps → Stable without

## Alternative Designs Considered

### Option A: Sigmoid Instead of Tanh
```python
edge_in = torch.sigmoid(edge_in_proj(edge_flat))  # [0, 1]
```
- **Pros**: Positive values only, matches softplus output
- **Cons**: Gradient vanishing at extremes worse than tanh

### Option B: GELU/Swish
```python
edge_in = F.gelu(edge_in_proj(edge_flat))  # Unbounded but smoother
```
- **Pros**: Better gradient flow than ReLU
- **Cons**: Still unbounded, doesn't solve core issue

### Option C: Reduce Edge Dimension
```python
edge_d_model = 8  # Instead of 16
```
- **Pros**: Less explosion, less memory
- **Cons**: May reduce capacity too much

### Option D: Remove Edge Stream Entirely
- **Pros**: Maximum stability
- **Cons**: Loses learned adjacency capability

**Recommendation**: Option A (Tanh + Norm) provides best stability/capacity tradeoff.

## Testing Strategy

### Unit Tests
```python
def test_bounded_edge_projection():
    """Verify edge projection stays bounded."""
    proj = BoundedEdgeProjection(1, 16)

    # Test with extreme inputs
    x = torch.randn(32, 171, 960, 1) * 1000
    y = proj(x)

    assert y.abs().max() <= 2.0  # Bounded by tanh + norm
    assert torch.isfinite(y).all()

def test_edge_gradient_flow():
    """Verify gradients flow through edge stream."""
    # Test gradient magnitude through 1→16→1 path

def test_edge_mamba_stability():
    """Verify Edge Mamba remains stable with bounded input."""
```

### Integration Tests
```python
def test_edge_stream_e2e():
    """Test full edge stream path."""
    # Edge features → projection → Mamba → weights

def test_adjacency_from_bounded_edges():
    """Verify adjacency matrix quality with bounded edges."""
```

## Rollout Plan

### Phase 1: Add Bounded Activation (After PR-1)
1. Add tanh activation after edge_in_proj
2. Add RMSNorm after tanh
3. Test with existing clamps still in place

### Phase 2: Tune Initialization
1. Reduce edge_in_proj initialization std
2. Test gradient flow
3. Verify edge weight distribution

### Phase 3: Remove Redundant Clamps
1. Remove edge_in clamp (-3, 3)
2. Remove edge_feats clamp (-0.99, 0.99)
3. Verify stability over 1000 batches

## Success Metrics

### Must Have
- [ ] Edge stream stable without manual clamps
- [ ] Edge weights remain in reasonable range [0, 10]
- [ ] Adjacency matrix quality maintained

### Nice to Have
- [ ] Reduce edge dimension to 8 (memory savings)
- [ ] Improve edge gradient flow
- [ ] Faster convergence of edge learning

## Risks and Mitigations

### Risk 1: Reduced Edge Capacity
- **Mitigation**: Start with tanh, can try SELU if needed

### Risk 2: Gradient Vanishing in Tanh
- **Mitigation**: RMSNorm rescales gradients

### Risk 3: Edge Weights Too Small
- **Mitigation**: Adjust softplus or add learnable scale

## Questions for Cross-Validation

1. Tanh vs Sigmoid for bounded activation?
2. Should we try graduated expansion (1→4→8→16)?
3. Is 16D necessary or can we use 8D?
4. Should edge normalization use different epsilon?
5. Keep Softplus or try exponential for edge weights?

## Performance Considerations

### Memory Impact
- No change with same dimensions
- 50% reduction if edge_d_model: 16→8

### Compute Impact
- Tanh: ~same cost as ReLU
- RMSNorm: Small overhead (~1% total)

## Code References

### Tanh Best Practices
- PyTorch docs: https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/nn.html#torch.nn.Tanh
- Initialization: https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/nn.init.html

### Similar Architectures
- Graph Attention Networks use sigmoid for attention
- Transformer uses bounded softmax for weights
- Neural ODE uses tanh for stability

---

**STATUS**: Ready for cross-validation with senior AI agent before implementation

Commit message:

docs: Update architectural instability fix documentation with detailed intervention inventory
Expanded the architectural instability fix document to include a comprehensive inventory of manual interventions, detailing 27 clamps and their specific locations within the codebase. This update emphasizes the need for architectural improvements by providing clear references for each clamp and outlining the associated NaN/Inf replacements and gradient sanitization paths. The document serves as a critical resource for understanding current stability measures and guiding future enhancements.

PR2_BOUNDED_EDGE_STREAM_PLAN.md, after:

# PR-2: Bounded Edge Stream - Detailed Planning Document

## Problem Statement

The edge stream has a **pathological 16x dimension explosion**:
```
1D edge features → 16D projection → BiMamba → 1D output
```

Without bounded activation, this causes:
- Values exploding to ±infinity
- Gradient explosion/vanishing
- Required manual clamp at line 258: `edge_in = torch.clamp(edge_in, -3.0, 3.0)`

## Theoretical Foundation

### Literature Support

1. **"Searching for Activation Functions" (Ramachandran et al., 2017)**
   - Shows bounded activations (tanh, sigmoid) provide stability
   - Swish/GELU can explode without normalization

2. **"Understanding the Difficulty of Training Deep Networks" (Glorot & Bengio, 2010)**
   - Dimension changes require careful activation choice
   - Bounded activations prevent gradient issues

3. **"Fixing the Stationary Point Problem in Deep Networks" (Pennington et al., 2017)**
   - Shows tanh maintains gradient flow better than ReLU in deep networks
   - Critical for dimension-changing projections

4. **"Self-Normalizing Neural Networks" (Klambauer et al., 2017)**
   - Proves certain activation patterns lead to self-normalization
   - SELU for this purpose, but tanh + norm achieves similar effect

## Current Problem Analysis

### The 16x Explosion Path
```python
# Current implementation (UNSTABLE)
edge_feats = compute_edge_features(x)  # (B, 171, 960, 1)
# Note: Actually uses Conv1d, not Linear (detector.py:377)
edge_in_proj = nn.Conv1d(1, 16, kernel_size=1)  # 16x expansion!
edge_in = edge_in_proj(edge_feats)  # (B*171, 16, 960) - UNBOUNDED
edge_in = torch.clamp(edge_in, -3, 3)  # BAND-AID at detector.py:258

edge_mamba = BiMamba2(d_model=16)
edge_out = edge_mamba(edge_in)  # Can still explode

edge_out_proj = nn.Conv1d(16, 1, kernel_size=1)  # 16x contraction
edge_weights = F.softplus(edge_out_proj(edge_out))  # Finally bounded
```

### Mathematical Analysis

Without bounds, variance grows as:
```
Var(edge_in) = 16 * Var(edge_feats) * Var(W)
```

With ReLU activation and He initialization:
```
After projection: σ² → 16σ²
After Mamba (6 layers): σ² → 16^6 σ² = 16,777,216σ²
```

**Result**: Values reach ±10^6 range, causing NaN.

## Proposed Solution

### 1. Bounded Activation After Projection

Replace:
```python
# detector.py:254-258
edge_in = self.edge_in_proj(edge_flat).contiguous()  # Unbounded
edge_in = torch.clamp(edge_in, -3.0, 3.0)  # Band-aid
```

With:
```python
edge_in = self.edge_in_proj(edge_flat).contiguous()  # (B*E, 16, T)
edge_in = torch.tanh(edge_in)  # Bounded [-1, 1]
# Use GroupNorm for Conv1d output (no reshape needed)
edge_in = nn.GroupNorm(1, 16)(edge_in)  # Normalized
```

### 2. Improved Initialization

```python
# Current: Already has conservative initialization (detector.py:382)
edge_in_proj = nn.Conv1d(1, 16, kernel_size=1)
nn.init.xavier_uniform_(edge_in_proj.weight, gain=0.1)  # Already reduced!

# Good news: Initialization is already conservative
# Just need to add bounded activation
```

### 3. Optional: Graduated Expansion

Instead of 1→16 directly, use graduated expansion:
```python
edge_lift = nn.Sequential(
    nn.Linear(1, 4),
    nn.Tanh(),
    nn.Linear(4, 8),
    nn.Tanh(),
    nn.Linear(8, 16),
    nn.Tanh(),
    RMSNorm(16)
)
```

## Configuration Schema

```yaml
model:
  graph:
    # Edge lifting configuration
    edge_lift_activation: str  # "tanh" | "sigmoid" | "selu" | "none"
    edge_lift_norm: str  # "rmsnorm" | "layernorm" | "none"
    edge_lift_init_std: float  # 0.1 (conservative)

    # Edge dimension
    edge_d_model: int  # 16 (current) | 8 (memory-efficient)

    # Graduated expansion
    edge_graduated_expansion: bool  # false (default) | true
    edge_expansion_stages: list  # [1, 4, 8, 16] if graduated

    # Edge Mamba config
    edge_mamba_layers: int  # 2 (current)
    edge_mamba_d_state: int  # 8 (current)
```

## Mathematical Guarantees

### With Tanh Activation
```
Given: x ∈ [-∞, +∞]
After tanh: y ∈ [-1, +1]
After RMSNorm: y' has unit RMS
→ Bounded regardless of input magnitude
```

### Gradient Flow
```
tanh'(x) = 1 - tanh²(x) ∈ (0, 1]
Maximum at x=0: tanh'(0) = 1
Minimum as x→±∞: tanh'(±∞) → 0
```

With RMSNorm, gradients are rescaled to prevent vanishing.

## Impact Analysis

### Clamps That Become Redundant
```python
# Can remove after PR-2:
detector.py:258: edge_in = torch.clamp(edge_in, -3.0, 3.0)  # Main target

# May keep for safety:
detector.py:250: edge_feats = torch.clamp(edge_feats, -0.99, 0.99)  # Input validation
edge_features.py:77: x_norm = torch.clamp(x_norm, -10.0, 10.0)  # After normalization
```

### Expected Improvements
- Edge stream variance: Unbounded → O(1)
- Gradient variance in edge path: 100+ → <5
- Edge Mamba stability: Requires clamps → Stable without

## Alternative Designs Considered

### Option A: Sigmoid Instead of Tanh
```python
edge_in = torch.sigmoid(edge_in_proj(edge_flat))  # [0, 1]
```
- **Pros**: Positive values only, matches softplus output
- **Cons**: Gradient vanishing at extremes worse than tanh

### Option B: GELU/Swish
```python
edge_in = F.gelu(edge_in_proj(edge_flat))  # Unbounded but smoother
```
- **Pros**: Better gradient flow than ReLU
- **Cons**: Still unbounded, doesn't solve core issue

### Option C: Reduce Edge Dimension
```python
edge_d_model = 8  # Instead of 16
```
- **Pros**: Less explosion, less memory
- **Cons**: May reduce capacity too much

### Option D: Remove Edge Stream Entirely
- **Pros**: Maximum stability
- **Cons**: Loses learned adjacency capability

**Recommendation**: Option A (Tanh + Norm) provides best stability/capacity tradeoff.

## Testing Strategy

### Unit Tests
```python
def test_bounded_edge_projection():
    """Verify edge projection stays bounded."""
    proj = BoundedEdgeProjection(1, 16)

    # Test with extreme inputs
    x = torch.randn(32, 171, 960, 1) * 1000
    y = proj(x)

    assert y.abs().max() <= 2.0  # Bounded by tanh + norm
    assert torch.isfinite(y).all()

def test_edge_gradient_flow():
    """Verify gradients flow through edge stream."""
    # Test gradient magnitude through 1→16→1 path

def test_edge_mamba_stability():
    """Verify Edge Mamba remains stable with bounded input."""
```

### Integration Tests
```python
def test_edge_stream_e2e():
    """Test full edge stream path."""
    # Edge features → projection → Mamba → weights

def test_adjacency_from_bounded_edges():
    """Verify adjacency matrix quality with bounded edges."""
```

## Rollout Plan

### Phase 1: Add Bounded Activation (After PR-1)
1. Add tanh activation after edge_in_proj
2. Add RMSNorm after tanh
3. Test with existing clamps still in place

### Phase 2: Tune Initialization
1. Reduce edge_in_proj initialization std
2. Test gradient flow
3. Verify edge weight distribution

### Phase 3: Remove Redundant Clamps
1. Remove edge_in clamp (-3, 3)
2. Remove edge_feats clamp (-0.99, 0.99)
3. Verify stability over 1000 batches

## Success Metrics

### Must Have
- [ ] Edge stream stable without the [-3, 3] clamp
- [ ] Edge weights remain in reasonable range via softplus
- [ ] Adjacency matrix quality maintained
- [ ] No NaN/Inf in edge stream for 1000 batches

### Nice to Have
- [ ] Reduce edge dimension to 8 (memory savings)
- [ ] Improve edge gradient flow
- [ ] Faster convergence of edge learning

## Risks and Mitigations

### Risk 1: Reduced Edge Capacity
- **Mitigation**: Start with tanh, can try SELU if needed

### Risk 2: Gradient Vanishing in Tanh
- **Mitigation**: RMSNorm rescales gradients

### Risk 3: Edge Weights Too Small
- **Mitigation**: Adjust softplus or add learnable scale

## Questions for Cross-Validation

1. Tanh vs Sigmoid for bounded activation?
2. Should we try graduated expansion (1→4→8→16)?
3. Is 16D necessary or can we use 8D?
4. Should edge normalization use different epsilon?
5. Keep Softplus or try exponential for edge weights?

## Performance Considerations

### Memory Impact
- No change with same dimensions
- 50% reduction if edge_d_model: 16→8

### Compute Impact
- Tanh: ~same cost as ReLU
- RMSNorm: Small overhead (~1% total)

## Code References

### Tanh Best Practices
- PyTorch docs: https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/nn.html#torch.nn.Tanh
- Initialization: https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/nn.init.html

### Similar Architectures
- Graph Attention Networks use sigmoid for attention
- Transformer uses bounded softmax for weights
- Neural ODE uses tanh for stability

---

**STATUS**: Ready for cross-validation with senior AI agent before implementation
