docs/phases/PHASE3_TRAINING_PIPELINE.md, before:

# PHASE3_TRAINING_PIPELINE.md — Training & Evaluation Orchestration

## 🎯 Phase 3 Goal
Build a robust, reproducible training and evaluation pipeline that trains the Phase 2 model on standardized EEG windows and reports clinically relevant metrics (TAES, FA/24h curves) with clean logging, checkpointing, and early stopping.

## 📋 Phase 3 Checklist
- [ ] Data loaders (balanced sampling, reproducible splits)
- [ ] Loss/optimizer/scheduler wired to config
- [ ] AMP + gradient clipping + sanity protections
- [ ] Validation loop with TAES, FA@{10,5,2.5,1}
- [ ] Checkpointing + early stopping (metric from config)
- [ ] Logging (TensorBoard; optional Weights & Biases)
- [ ] CLI integration (`python -m src.experiment.pipeline --config ...`)
- [ ] TDD: unit + smoke tests, quality gates green

## 🔧 Implementation Files
```
src/experiment/pipeline.py        # Orchestration: train/validate loops
src/experiment/evaluate.py        # Metrics: TAES, FA/24h, AUROC (stub -> full)
src/experiment/data.py            # (Phase 1) EEG I/O + preprocessing + windows
src/experiment/models.py          # (Phase 2) Full model

tests/test_training.py            # Training smoke/TDD
tests/test_evaluate.py            # Metrics unit tests (TAES, FA curves)
```

## 📐 Data & Splits
- Input windows: `(B, 19, 15360)` at 256 Hz (60s, 10s stride) — consistent with Phase 1.
- **Canonical training labels**: `(B, 15360)` binary masks (any-channel seizure). If a dataset provides per-channel labels `(B, 19, 15360)`, aggregate once via `labels.max(dim=1)[0]`.
- Train/val split: `data.validation_split` from config (default 0.2).
- **Balanced sampling**: Use `WeightedRandomSampler` at dataset scope to oversample positive windows (compute once, not per batch).
  ```python
  # window_labels: (N, T) aggregated binary labels per window
  window_has_seizure = (window_labels.max(dim=1).values > 0).float()  # (N,)
  pos_ratio = float(window_has_seizure.mean().item())
  pos_weight = (1 - pos_ratio) / max(pos_ratio, 1e-8)

  # Per-sample weights: positives get pos_weight, negatives 1.0
  sample_weights = torch.where(window_has_seizure > 0, pos_weight, 1.0)
  sampler = WeightedRandomSampler(sample_weights, num_samples=len(sample_weights), replacement=True)
  ```
- DataLoader:
  - `batch_size`: from config
  - `num_workers`: from config
  - `pin_memory=True` when CUDA available
  - `sampler=sampler` for balanced training
  - Deterministic seeding from `experiment.seed` (set a `torch.Generator` with `manual_seed(seed)` and a `worker_init_fn` to seed NumPy/Python per worker).

## 🔨 Loss, Optimizer, Scheduler
- **Loss**: Binary cross-entropy over per-timestep probabilities with element-wise weighting.
  - Model outputs `(B, 15360)` (sigmoid already applied in Phase 2.5)
  - Labels: `(B, 15360)` (aggregate once if necessary)
  - Class imbalance handling (99% neg / 1% pos typical): compute `pos_ratio` over the training set, then do element-wise weighting with reduction='none'.
  ```python
  bce = nn.BCELoss(reduction='none')
  pos_weight = (1 - pos_ratio) / max(pos_ratio, 1e-8)
  weights = torch.where(labels_agg > 0, pos_weight, 1.0)  # (B, 15360)
  per_elem = bce(outputs, labels_agg)
  loss = (per_elem * weights).sum() / (weights.sum() + 1e-8)
  ```
  - Note: If you prefer logits + `nn.BCEWithLogitsLoss(pos_weight=...)`, remove the Sigmoid in the model head and adjust accordingly.
- **Optimizer**: AdamW with `learning_rate`, `weight_decay` from `training` config.
- **Scheduler**: Cosine with warmup (`scheduler.type=cosine`, `warmup_ratio` from config). Step per-iteration if using a step-based schedule (recommended for windows); otherwise step per-epoch. Document and keep consistent with the chosen scheduler.
- **Gradient clipping**: `training.gradient_clip` (global-norm) each step.
- **Mixed precision**: `training.mixed_precision` → use `torch.cuda.amp.autocast` + `GradScaler` when CUDA.

## 🔁 Training Loop (Epoch)
1) **Train step**:
   ```python
   for batch_idx, (windows, labels) in enumerate(train_loader):
       # windows: (B, 19, 15360), labels: (B, 19, 15360)
       labels_agg = labels.max(dim=1)[0]  # (B, 15360) any-seizure

       with autocast(enabled=use_amp):
           outputs = model(windows)  # (B, 15360)
           per_elem = bce(outputs, labels_agg)           # reduction='none'
           weights = torch.where(labels_agg > 0, pos_weight, 1.0)
           loss = (per_elem * weights).sum() / (weights.sum() + 1e-8)

       scaler.scale(loss).backward()
       scaler.unscale_(optimizer)
       torch.nn.utils.clip_grad_norm_(model.parameters(), gradient_clip)
       scaler.step(optimizer)
       scaler.update()
       scheduler.step()
   ```

2) **Validation step** (end of epoch):
   - Forward on val set → collect probabilities over time.
   - Reconstruct per‑record timelines (window stitching): concatenate overlapping windows for each record using overlap‑aware averaging so that metrics operate on continuous sequences per record (not isolated windows).
   - Post‑processing → events: apply hysteresis from `postprocessing.hysteresis` (τ_on=0.86, τ_off=0.78), then morphology (`postprocessing.morphology.kernel_size`, in samples), then convert to event intervals [(start_s, end_s), ...].
   - Metrics (event‑level): TAES, AUROC (prob‑wise), sensitivity@FA rates and FA/24h computed from event lists. Compute total_hours as the sum over records of (duration_seconds / 3600).

3) **Early stopping + checkpointing**:
   - Metric: `training.early_stopping.metric` (default: `sensitivity_at_10fa`)
   - Patience from config
   - Checkpoint format:
     ```python
     checkpoint = {
         'epoch': epoch,
         'model_state_dict': model.state_dict(),
         'optimizer_state_dict': optimizer.state_dict(),
         'scheduler_state_dict': scheduler.state_dict(),
         'config': config.to_dict(),
         'best_metric': best_metric,
         'metric_name': early_stopping.metric
     }
     torch.save(checkpoint, 'results/checkpoints/best.pt')
     ```

## 🧪 Evaluation & Metrics

### TAES Implementation (Time-Aligned Event Scoring)
Based on Picone et al. 2021, TAES scores temporal alignment and penalizes false alarms. The simple overlap‑weighted variant below is implementation‑ready and can be extended to DP‑alignment if desired:
```python
def calculate_taes(
    pred_events: List[Tuple[float, float]],  # [(start, end), ...]
    ref_events: List[Tuple[float, float]],
) -> float:
    """
    Calculate TAES based on temporal overlap and FP penalty.

    For each reference event r:
    - Compute ov_r = sum of overlaps with any predicted event (seconds)
    - dur_r = duration of r (seconds)
    - per‑event score s_r = clip(ov_r / max(dur_r, 1e-8), 0, 1)

    False alarm penalty:
    - For each predicted event p with zero overlap to any ref, accumulate its duration
      fp_dur = sum_{p without overlap}(p_end - p_start)

    TAES = mean(s_r over ref events) - alpha * (fp_dur / max(total_pred_span, 1e-8))
    where total_pred_span = sum_{p}(p_end - p_start), alpha ~ 0.1–0.2 (tunable).

    Returns TAES in [0, 1] approximately; clamp to [0,1] after penalty.
    """
    # Helper: overlap(a, b) defined below.
    def _ov(a, b):
        return max(0.0, min(a[1], b[1]) - max(a[0], b[0]))

    if not ref_events:
        return 0.0

    # Overlap scores per reference event
    per_ref = []
    for r in ref_events:
        dur_r = max(0.0, r[1] - r[0])
        ov_r = sum(_ov(r, p) for p in pred_events)
        per_ref.append(max(0.0, min(1.0, ov_r / max(dur_r, 1e-8))))

    # False alarm penalty
    fp_dur = 0.0
    for p in pred_events:
        if all(_ov(p, r) <= 0.0 for r in ref_events):
            fp_dur += max(0.0, p[1] - p[0])
    total_pred_span = sum(max(0.0, p[1] - p[0]) for p in pred_events)

    alpha = 0.15  # tune on validation
    base = sum(per_ref) / len(per_ref)
    taes = base - alpha * (fp_dur / max(total_pred_span, 1e-8))
    return float(max(0.0, min(1.0, taes)))
```

Eventization helpers (expected signatures):
```python
def batch_masks_to_events(masks: torch.Tensor, fs: int) -> List[List[Tuple[float, float]]]:
    """
    Convert binary masks per record to event intervals in seconds.
    masks: (N, T) with values {0,1}; fs: sampling rate (e.g., 256).
    Returns: list of length N, each is a list of (start_s, end_s) tuples.
    """

def batch_probs_to_events(
    probs: torch.Tensor,
    post_cfg: PostprocessingConfig,
    fs: int,
    threshold: float,
) -> List[List[Tuple[float, float]]]:
    """
    Apply threshold + hysteresis + morphology to probabilities, then convert to events.
    probs: (N, T) in [0,1]; post_cfg supplies hysteresis (tau_on/off), morphology kernel (samples), min_duration (seconds).
    Returns: list of per‑record (start_s, end_s) pairs.
    """
```

### FA/24h Calculation (event-level)
```python
def fa_per_24h(
    pred_events: List[List[Tuple[float, float]]],  # per-record predicted events (s)
    ref_events: List[List[Tuple[float, float]]],   # per-record reference events (s)
    total_hours: float,
) -> float:
    """False alarms per 24h: count predicted events with no overlap to any ref event, normalized by duration."""
    fa = 0
    for preds, refs in zip(pred_events, ref_events):
        for p in preds:
            if not any(overlap(p, r) > 0 for r in refs):
                fa += 1
    return (fa / max(total_hours, 1e-8)) * 24.0

# Overlap helper used by multiple metrics
def overlap(a: Tuple[float, float], b: Tuple[float, float]) -> float:
    """Return intersection length in seconds between [a0,a1] and [b0,b1]."""
    return max(0.0, min(a[1], b[1]) - max(a[0], b[0]))
```

### Sensitivity at FA Rates (event-level)
```python
def sensitivity_at_fa_rates(
    probs: torch.Tensor,                   # (N, T) probabilities
    labels: torch.Tensor,                  # (N, T) binary
    fa_targets: List[float],               # [10, 5, 2.5, 1]
    post_cfg: PostprocessingConfig,
    sampling_rate: int = 256,
) -> Dict[str, float]:
    """Find sensitivity at specific FA/24h operating points using eventization + threshold search."""
    results = {}
    # Convert reference labels to event lists once
    ref_events = batch_masks_to_events(labels, sampling_rate)
    total_hours = labels.numel() / (sampling_rate * 3600)

    for fa_target in fa_targets:
        # Binary search threshold to meet target FA/24h (conservative: highest thr meeting target)
        thr = find_threshold_for_fa_eventized(
            probs, post_cfg, ref_events, fa_target, total_hours, sampling_rate
        )
        pred_events = batch_probs_to_events(probs, post_cfg, sampling_rate, threshold=thr)
        # Sensitivity = fraction of ref events overlapped by any prediction
        tp = 0
        n_ref = 0
        for refs, preds in zip(ref_events, pred_events):
            n_ref += len(refs)
            for r in refs:
                if any(overlap(r, p) > 0 for p in preds):
                    tp += 1
        results[f'sensitivity_at_{fa_target}fa'] = float(tp / max(n_ref, 1))
    return results
```

Threshold search (expected behaviour):
```python
def find_threshold_for_fa_eventized(
    probs: torch.Tensor,
    post_cfg: PostprocessingConfig,
    ref_events: List[List[Tuple[float, float]]],
    fa_target: float,
    total_hours: float,
    fs: int,
) -> float:
    """
    Binary search threshold in [0,1] for ~20 iters.
    If FA > target, increase threshold; else decrease.
    Return the highest threshold meeting fa_target (conservative operating point).
    """
    ...
```

Expected evaluation API:
```python
from src.experiment.schemas import PostprocessingConfig

def evaluate_predictions(
    probs: torch.Tensor,             # (N, T)
    labels: torch.Tensor,            # (N, T)
    fa_rates: List[float],           # [10, 5, 2.5, 1]
    post_cfg: PostprocessingConfig,  # Pydantic config
) -> Dict[str, Any]:
    """
    Return dict of metrics including TAES, AUROC, and sensitivity@FA.

    Keys: {
        'taes': float,
        'auroc': float,
        'sensitivity_at_10fa': float,
        'sensitivity_at_5fa': float,
        'sensitivity_at_2.5fa': float,
        'sensitivity_at_1fa': float,
        'fa_curve': List[Tuple[float, float]],  # (FA/24h, sensitivity)
    }
    """
```

## 🧾 Logging & Checkpointing
- **TensorBoard**: scalar logs (train/val loss, metrics), learning-rate, gradients optional
- **Weights & Biases** (optional): use `experiment.wandb.enabled`
- **Checkpoints**:
  - Best by metric: `results/checkpoints/best.pt`
  - Last epoch: `results/checkpoints/last.pt`
  - Resume capability with full state restoration

## 🖥️ CLI & Commands
- Validate config: `python -m src.cli validate configs/local.yaml`
- Train (local/dev): `python -m src.experiment.pipeline --config configs/local.yaml`
- Train (production): `python -m src.experiment.pipeline --config configs/production.yaml`
- Resume training: `python -m src.experiment.pipeline --config configs/local.yaml --resume results/checkpoints/last.pt`
- Makefile shortcuts:
  - `make train-local` → local config
  - `make train-prod` → production config

## 🧪 TDD Plan (Tests First)

### `tests/test_training.py` (smoke)
```python
def test_training_smoke():
    """Single epoch with tiny synthetic data."""
    # Create balanced synthetic dataset (10 windows)
    windows = torch.randn(10, 19, 15360)
    labels = torch.zeros(10, 19, 15360)
    labels[::2, :, 5000:10000] = 1  # 50% positive

    # Mini config
    config = Config.from_yaml('configs/local.yaml')
    config.data.max_samples = 10
    config.training.epochs = 1

    # Train one epoch
    model = SeizureDetector()
    train_epoch(model, dataloader, config)

    # Verify: loss finite, checkpoint written, no NaN
```

### `tests/test_evaluate.py` (unit)
```python
def test_taes_perfect_overlap():
    """TAES should be 1.0 for perfect overlap."""
    ref_events = [(10, 20), (30, 40)]
    pred_events = [(10, 20), (30, 40)]
    assert calculate_taes(pred_events, ref_events) == 1.0

def test_taes_no_overlap():
    """TAES should be 0.0 for no overlap."""
    ref_events = [(10, 20)]
    pred_events = [(30, 40)]
    assert calculate_taes(pred_events, ref_events) == 0.0

def test_fa_per_24h_event_level():
    """Verify FA/24h counts predicted events without overlap to refs."""
    # 1 hour total, 10 predicted events, 0 reference events → 10 FA/hr → 240 FA/24h
    pred_events = [[(i*300.0, i*300.0 + 5.0) for i in range(10)]]  # 10 events in 3600s
    ref_events = [[]]
    fa_rate = fa_per_24h(pred_events, ref_events, total_hours=1.0)
    assert abs(fa_rate - 240.0) < 1e-3

def test_sensitivity_at_fa_event_level(post_cfg):
    """Monotonicity: sensitivity decreases as target FA/24h decreases."""
    # Construct simple probabilities/labels where higher thresholds reduce FA and sensitivity
    probs = torch.linspace(0, 1, steps=2048).unsqueeze(0)        # (1, T)
    labels = (probs > 0.6).float()                               # (1, T)
    metrics = sensitivity_at_fa_rates(probs, labels, [10, 5, 1], post_cfg, sampling_rate=256)
    assert metrics['sensitivity_at_10fa'] >= metrics['sensitivity_at_5fa']
    assert metrics['sensitivity_at_5fa'] >= metrics['sensitivity_at_1fa']
```

Quality gates:
- `make q` (ruff + format + mypy) → all files green
- `pytest -m unit -v` and `pytest -m integration -v` on CI

## ⚙️ Implementation Notes
- **Seeding**: set `torch`, `numpy`, `random`, and DataLoader seeds from `experiment.seed`
- **DataLoader determinism**: pass a `torch.Generator().manual_seed(seed)` to DataLoader and a `worker_init_fn` that seeds NumPy/Python per worker.
 - **DataLoader determinism**: pass a `torch.Generator().manual_seed(seed)` to DataLoader and a `worker_init_fn` that seeds NumPy/Python per worker (e.g., `np.random.seed(seed + worker_id); random.seed(seed + worker_id)`). Do not set `shuffle=True` when using a sampler.
 - **Scheduler stepping**: for per‑iteration schedules, compute `total_steps = epochs * len(train_loader)` and step once per optimization update; keep warmup as a fraction of total_steps.
- **Device**: `experiment.device=auto` → pick CUDA if available; otherwise CPU
- **Class imbalance**: typical 99% negative, 1% positive
  - For probabilities output: use element-wise weighting with `BCELoss(reduction='none')` as shown above
  - For logits output: use `BCEWithLogitsLoss(pos_weight=...)` and remove Sigmoid from the model head
  - WeightedRandomSampler at dataset scope for balanced mini-batches
- **Performance**:
  - Use `pin_memory=True` with CUDA
  - Consider `torch.compile` for model when PyTorch 2.5+
  - Pre-allocate tensors; avoid `.cpu()` copies in loops

## ✅ Definition of Done (Phase 3)
1) Training and validation loops implemented and configurable from YAML
2) Metrics computed per spec (TAES, AUROC, FA curves; sensitivity@{10,5,2.5,1})
3) Reproducible results with fixed seed
4) Checkpointing + early stopping honoring config
5) Logging via TensorBoard; optional W&B
6) Quality gates green; tests passing (unit + smoke)

## 🔗 Config Alignment (matches schemas.py exactly)
- Optimizer: `training.optimizer=adamw`
- Scheduler: `training.scheduler.type=cosine`, `warmup_ratio`
- AMP: `training.mixed_precision=true|false`
- Clip: `training.gradient_clip` (float)
- Early stopping: `training.early_stopping.{patience, metric}`
- Post-processing: `postprocessing.hysteresis.{tau_on,tau_off}`, `morphology.kernel_size`
- Evaluation: `evaluation.{metrics,fa_rates}`
- Mamba conv: `model.mamba.conv_kernel` (NOT d_conv or mamba_d_conv)

---
Status: Ready for implementation (TDD-first) ✅
Estimated Time: 2–3 days
Owners: Training duo (eng + reviewer) 🔬🚀

Commit message:

docs: update training pipeline documentation for CLI integration
- Revised the training pipeline documentation to specify the current location of the CLI integration, clarifying how to invoke it using `python -m src ...`.
- Ensured that the documentation reflects the latest structure and provides clear guidance for users on utilizing the CLI for training configurations.
- Aimed to enhance the usability and accuracy of the training pipeline documentation in line with recent changes.

docs/phases/PHASE3_TRAINING_PIPELINE.md, after:

# PHASE3_TRAINING_PIPELINE.md — Training & Evaluation Orchestration

## 🎯 Phase 3 Goal
Build a robust, reproducible training and evaluation pipeline that trains the Phase 2 model on standardized EEG windows and reports clinically relevant metrics (TAES, FA/24h curves) with clean logging, checkpointing, and early stopping.

## 📋 Phase 3 Checklist
- [ ] Data loaders (balanced sampling, reproducible splits)
- [ ] Loss/optimizer/scheduler wired to config
- [ ] AMP + gradient clipping + sanity protections
- [ ] Validation loop with TAES, FA@{10,5,2.5,1}
- [ ] Checkpointing + early stopping (metric from config)
- [ ] Logging (TensorBoard; optional Weights & Biases)
- [ ] CLI integration (current CLI lives at `src/brain_brr/cli/cli.py` and is invoked as `python -m src ...`)
- [ ] TDD: unit + smoke tests, quality gates green

## 🔧 Implementation Files
```
src/experiment/pipeline.py        # Orchestration: train/validate loops
src/experiment/evaluate.py        # Metrics: TAES, FA/24h, AUROC (stub -> full)
src/experiment/data.py            # (Phase 1) EEG I/O + preprocessing + windows
src/experiment/models.py          # (Phase 2) Full model

tests/test_training.py            # Training smoke/TDD
tests/test_evaluate.py            # Metrics unit tests (TAES, FA curves)
```

## 📐 Data & Splits
- Input windows: `(B, 19, 15360)` at 256 Hz (60s, 10s stride) — consistent with Phase 1.
- **Canonical training labels**: `(B, 15360)` binary masks (any-channel seizure). If a dataset provides per-channel labels `(B, 19, 15360)`, aggregate once via `labels.max(dim=1)[0]`.
- Train/val split: `data.validation_split` from config (default 0.2).
- **Balanced sampling**: Use `WeightedRandomSampler` at dataset scope to oversample positive windows (compute once, not per batch).
  ```python
  # window_labels: (N, T) aggregated binary labels per window
  window_has_seizure = (window_labels.max(dim=1).values > 0).float()  # (N,)
  pos_ratio = float(window_has_seizure.mean().item())
  pos_weight = (1 - pos_ratio) / max(pos_ratio, 1e-8)

  # Per-sample weights: positives get pos_weight, negatives 1.0
  sample_weights = torch.where(window_has_seizure > 0, pos_weight, 1.0)
  sampler = WeightedRandomSampler(sample_weights, num_samples=len(sample_weights), replacement=True)
  ```
- DataLoader:
  - `batch_size`: from config
  - `num_workers`: from config
  - `pin_memory=True` when CUDA available
  - `sampler=sampler` for balanced training
  - Deterministic seeding from `experiment.seed` (set a `torch.Generator` with `manual_seed(seed)` and a `worker_init_fn` to seed NumPy/Python per worker).

## 🔨 Loss, Optimizer, Scheduler
- **Loss**: Binary cross-entropy over per-timestep probabilities with element-wise weighting.
  - Model outputs `(B, 15360)` (sigmoid already applied in Phase 2.5)
  - Labels: `(B, 15360)` (aggregate once if necessary)
  - Class imbalance handling (99% neg / 1% pos typical): compute `pos_ratio` over the training set, then do element-wise weighting with reduction='none'.
  ```python
  bce = nn.BCELoss(reduction='none')
  pos_weight = (1 - pos_ratio) / max(pos_ratio, 1e-8)
  weights = torch.where(labels_agg > 0, pos_weight, 1.0)  # (B, 15360)
  per_elem = bce(outputs, labels_agg)
  loss = (per_elem * weights).sum() / (weights.sum() + 1e-8)
  ```
  - Note: If you prefer logits + `nn.BCEWithLogitsLoss(pos_weight=...)`, remove the Sigmoid in the model head and adjust accordingly.
- **Optimizer**: AdamW with `learning_rate`, `weight_decay` from `training` config.
- **Scheduler**: Cosine with warmup (`scheduler.type=cosine`, `warmup_ratio` from config). Step per-iteration if using a step-based schedule (recommended for windows); otherwise step per-epoch. Document and keep consistent with the chosen scheduler.
- **Gradient clipping**: `training.gradient_clip` (global-norm) each step.
- **Mixed precision**: `training.mixed_precision` → use `torch.cuda.amp.autocast` + `GradScaler` when CUDA.

## 🔁 Training Loop (Epoch)
1) **Train step**:
   ```python
   for batch_idx, (windows, labels) in enumerate(train_loader):
       # windows: (B, 19, 15360), labels: (B, 19, 15360)
       labels_agg = labels.max(dim=1)[0]  # (B, 15360) any-seizure

       with autocast(enabled=use_amp):
           outputs = model(windows)  # (B, 15360)
           per_elem = bce(outputs, labels_agg)           # reduction='none'
           weights = torch.where(labels_agg > 0, pos_weight, 1.0)
           loss = (per_elem * weights).sum() / (weights.sum() + 1e-8)

       scaler.scale(loss).backward()
       scaler.unscale_(optimizer)
       torch.nn.utils.clip_grad_norm_(model.parameters(), gradient_clip)
       scaler.step(optimizer)
       scaler.update()
       scheduler.step()
   ```

2) **Validation step** (end of epoch):
   - Forward on val set → collect probabilities over time.
   - Reconstruct per‑record timelines (window stitching): concatenate overlapping windows for each record using overlap‑aware averaging so that metrics operate on continuous sequences per record (not isolated windows).
   - Post‑processing → events: apply hysteresis from `postprocessing.hysteresis` (τ_on=0.86, τ_off=0.78), then morphology (`postprocessing.morphology.kernel_size`, in samples), then convert to event intervals [(start_s, end_s), ...].
   - Metrics (event‑level): TAES, AUROC (prob‑wise), sensitivity@FA rates and FA/24h computed from event lists. Compute total_hours as the sum over records of (duration_seconds / 3600).

3) **Early stopping + checkpointing**:
   - Metric: `training.early_stopping.metric` (default: `sensitivity_at_10fa`)
   - Patience from config
   - Checkpoint format:
     ```python
     checkpoint = {
         'epoch': epoch,
         'model_state_dict': model.state_dict(),
         'optimizer_state_dict': optimizer.state_dict(),
         'scheduler_state_dict': scheduler.state_dict(),
         'config': config.to_dict(),
         'best_metric': best_metric,
         'metric_name': early_stopping.metric
     }
     torch.save(checkpoint, 'results/checkpoints/best.pt')
     ```

## 🧪 Evaluation & Metrics

### TAES Implementation (Time-Aligned Event Scoring)
Based on Picone et al. 2021, TAES scores temporal alignment and penalizes false alarms. The simple overlap‑weighted variant below is implementation‑ready and can be extended to DP‑alignment if desired:
```python
def calculate_taes(
    pred_events: List[Tuple[float, float]],  # [(start, end), ...]
    ref_events: List[Tuple[float, float]],
) -> float:
    """
    Calculate TAES based on temporal overlap and FP penalty.

    For each reference event r:
    - Compute ov_r = sum of overlaps with any predicted event (seconds)
    - dur_r = duration of r (seconds)
    - per‑event score s_r = clip(ov_r / max(dur_r, 1e-8), 0, 1)

    False alarm penalty:
    - For each predicted event p with zero overlap to any ref, accumulate its duration
      fp_dur = sum_{p without overlap}(p_end - p_start)

    TAES = mean(s_r over ref events) - alpha * (fp_dur / max(total_pred_span, 1e-8))
    where total_pred_span = sum_{p}(p_end - p_start), alpha ~ 0.1–0.2 (tunable).

    Returns TAES in [0, 1] approximately; clamp to [0,1] after penalty.
    """
    # Helper: overlap(a, b) defined below.
    def _ov(a, b):
        return max(0.0, min(a[1], b[1]) - max(a[0], b[0]))

    if not ref_events:
        return 0.0

    # Overlap scores per reference event
    per_ref = []
    for r in ref_events:
        dur_r = max(0.0, r[1] - r[0])
        ov_r = sum(_ov(r, p) for p in pred_events)
        per_ref.append(max(0.0, min(1.0, ov_r / max(dur_r, 1e-8))))

    # False alarm penalty
    fp_dur = 0.0
    for p in pred_events:
        if all(_ov(p, r) <= 0.0 for r in ref_events):
            fp_dur += max(0.0, p[1] - p[0])
    total_pred_span = sum(max(0.0, p[1] - p[0]) for p in pred_events)

    alpha = 0.15  # tune on validation
    base = sum(per_ref) / len(per_ref)
    taes = base - alpha * (fp_dur / max(total_pred_span, 1e-8))
    return float(max(0.0, min(1.0, taes)))
```

Eventization helpers (expected signatures):
```python
def batch_masks_to_events(masks: torch.Tensor, fs: int) -> List[List[Tuple[float, float]]]:
    """
    Convert binary masks per record to event intervals in seconds.
    masks: (N, T) with values {0,1}; fs: sampling rate (e.g., 256).
    Returns: list of length N, each is a list of (start_s, end_s) tuples.
    """

def batch_probs_to_events(
    probs: torch.Tensor,
    post_cfg: PostprocessingConfig,
    fs: int,
    threshold: float,
) -> List[List[Tuple[float, float]]]:
    """
    Apply threshold + hysteresis + morphology to probabilities, then convert to events.
    probs: (N, T) in [0,1]; post_cfg supplies hysteresis (tau_on/off), morphology kernel (samples), min_duration (seconds).
    Returns: list of per‑record (start_s, end_s) pairs.
    """
```

### FA/24h Calculation (event-level)
```python
def fa_per_24h(
    pred_events: List[List[Tuple[float, float]]],  # per-record predicted events (s)
    ref_events: List[List[Tuple[float, float]]],   # per-record reference events (s)
    total_hours: float,
) -> float:
    """False alarms per 24h: count predicted events with no overlap to any ref event, normalized by duration."""
    fa = 0
    for preds, refs in zip(pred_events, ref_events):
        for p in preds:
            if not any(overlap(p, r) > 0 for r in refs):
                fa += 1
    return (fa / max(total_hours, 1e-8)) * 24.0

# Overlap helper used by multiple metrics
def overlap(a: Tuple[float, float], b: Tuple[float, float]) -> float:
    """Return intersection length in seconds between [a0,a1] and [b0,b1]."""
    return max(0.0, min(a[1], b[1]) - max(a[0], b[0]))
```

### Sensitivity at FA Rates (event-level)
```python
def sensitivity_at_fa_rates(
    probs: torch.Tensor,                   # (N, T) probabilities
    labels: torch.Tensor,                  # (N, T) binary
    fa_targets: List[float],               # [10, 5, 2.5, 1]
    post_cfg: PostprocessingConfig,
    sampling_rate: int = 256,
) -> Dict[str, float]:
    """Find sensitivity at specific FA/24h operating points using eventization + threshold search."""
    results = {}
    # Convert reference labels to event lists once
    ref_events = batch_masks_to_events(labels, sampling_rate)
    total_hours = labels.numel() / (sampling_rate * 3600)

    for fa_target in fa_targets:
        # Binary search threshold to meet target FA/24h (conservative: highest thr meeting target)
        thr = find_threshold_for_fa_eventized(
            probs, post_cfg, ref_events, fa_target, total_hours, sampling_rate
        )
        pred_events = batch_probs_to_events(probs, post_cfg, sampling_rate, threshold=thr)
        # Sensitivity = fraction of ref events overlapped by any prediction
        tp = 0
        n_ref = 0
        for refs, preds in zip(ref_events, pred_events):
            n_ref += len(refs)
            for r in refs:
                if any(overlap(r, p) > 0 for p in preds):
                    tp += 1
        results[f'sensitivity_at_{fa_target}fa'] = float(tp / max(n_ref, 1))
    return results
```

Threshold search (expected behaviour):
```python
def find_threshold_for_fa_eventized(
    probs: torch.Tensor,
    post_cfg: PostprocessingConfig,
    ref_events: List[List[Tuple[float, float]]],
    fa_target: float,
    total_hours: float,
    fs: int,
) -> float:
    """
    Binary search threshold in [0,1] for ~20 iters.
    If FA > target, increase threshold; else decrease.
    Return the highest threshold meeting fa_target (conservative operating point).
    """
    ...
```

Expected evaluation API:
```python
from src.experiment.schemas import PostprocessingConfig

def evaluate_predictions(
    probs: torch.Tensor,             # (N, T)
    labels: torch.Tensor,            # (N, T)
    fa_rates: List[float],           # [10, 5, 2.5, 1]
    post_cfg: PostprocessingConfig,  # Pydantic config
) -> Dict[str, Any]:
    """
    Return dict of metrics including TAES, AUROC, and sensitivity@FA.

    Keys: {
        'taes': float,
        'auroc': float,
        'sensitivity_at_10fa': float,
        'sensitivity_at_5fa': float,
        'sensitivity_at_2.5fa': float,
        'sensitivity_at_1fa': float,
        'fa_curve': List[Tuple[float, float]],  # (FA/24h, sensitivity)
    }
    """
```

## 🧾 Logging & Checkpointing
- **TensorBoard**: scalar logs (train/val loss, metrics), learning-rate, gradients optional
- **Weights & Biases** (optional): use `experiment.wandb.enabled`
- **Checkpoints**:
  - Best by metric: `results/checkpoints/best.pt`
  - Last epoch: `results/checkpoints/last.pt`
  - Resume capability with full state restoration

## 🖥️ CLI & Commands
- Validate config: `python -m src.cli validate configs/local.yaml`
- Train (local/dev): `python -m src.experiment.pipeline --config configs/local.yaml`
- Train (production): `python -m src.experiment.pipeline --config configs/production.yaml`
- Resume training: `python -m src.experiment.pipeline --config configs/local.yaml --resume results/checkpoints/last.pt`
- Makefile shortcuts:
  - `make train-local` → local config
  - `make train-prod` → production config

## 🧪 TDD Plan (Tests First)

### `tests/test_training.py` (smoke)
```python
def test_training_smoke():
    """Single epoch with tiny synthetic data."""
    # Create balanced synthetic dataset (10 windows)
    windows = torch.randn(10, 19, 15360)
    labels = torch.zeros(10, 19, 15360)
    labels[::2, :, 5000:10000] = 1  # 50% positive

    # Mini config
    config = Config.from_yaml('configs/local.yaml')
    config.data.max_samples = 10
    config.training.epochs = 1

    # Train one epoch
    model = SeizureDetector()
    train_epoch(model, dataloader, config)

    # Verify: loss finite, checkpoint written, no NaN
```

### `tests/test_evaluate.py` (unit)
```python
def test_taes_perfect_overlap():
    """TAES should be 1.0 for perfect overlap."""
    ref_events = [(10, 20), (30, 40)]
    pred_events = [(10, 20), (30, 40)]
    assert calculate_taes(pred_events, ref_events) == 1.0

def test_taes_no_overlap():
    """TAES should be 0.0 for no overlap."""
    ref_events = [(10, 20)]
    pred_events = [(30, 40)]
    assert calculate_taes(pred_events, ref_events) == 0.0

def test_fa_per_24h_event_level():
    """Verify FA/24h counts predicted events without overlap to refs."""
    # 1 hour total, 10 predicted events, 0 reference events → 10 FA/hr → 240 FA/24h
    pred_events = [[(i*300.0, i*300.0 + 5.0) for i in range(10)]]  # 10 events in 3600s
    ref_events = [[]]
    fa_rate = fa_per_24h(pred_events, ref_events, total_hours=1.0)
    assert abs(fa_rate - 240.0) < 1e-3

def test_sensitivity_at_fa_event_level(post_cfg):
    """Monotonicity: sensitivity decreases as target FA/24h decreases."""
    # Construct simple probabilities/labels where higher thresholds reduce FA and sensitivity
    probs = torch.linspace(0, 1, steps=2048).unsqueeze(0)        # (1, T)
    labels = (probs > 0.6).float()                               # (1, T)
    metrics = sensitivity_at_fa_rates(probs, labels, [10, 5, 1], post_cfg, sampling_rate=256)
    assert metrics['sensitivity_at_10fa'] >= metrics['sensitivity_at_5fa']
    assert metrics['sensitivity_at_5fa'] >= metrics['sensitivity_at_1fa']
```

Quality gates:
- `make q` (ruff + format + mypy) → all files green
- `pytest -m unit -v` and `pytest -m integration -v` on CI

## ⚙️ Implementation Notes
- **Seeding**: set `torch`, `numpy`, `random`, and DataLoader seeds from `experiment.seed`
- **DataLoader determinism**: pass a `torch.Generator().manual_seed(seed)` to DataLoader and a `worker_init_fn` that seeds NumPy/Python per worker.
 - **DataLoader determinism**: pass a `torch.Generator().manual_seed(seed)` to DataLoader and a `worker_init_fn` that seeds NumPy/Python per worker (e.g., `np.random.seed(seed + worker_id); random.seed(seed + worker_id)`). Do not set `shuffle=True` when using a sampler.
 - **Scheduler stepping**: for per‑iteration schedules, compute `total_steps = epochs * len(train_loader)` and step once per optimization update; keep warmup as a fraction of total_steps.
- **Device**: `experiment.device=auto` → pick CUDA if available; otherwise CPU
- **Class imbalance**: typical 99% negative, 1% positive
  - For probabilities output: use element-wise weighting with `BCELoss(reduction='none')` as shown above
  - For logits output: use `BCEWithLogitsLoss(pos_weight=...)` and remove Sigmoid from the model head
  - WeightedRandomSampler at dataset scope for balanced mini-batches
- **Performance**:
  - Use `pin_memory=True` with CUDA
  - Consider `torch.compile` for model when PyTorch 2.5+
  - Pre-allocate tensors; avoid `.cpu()` copies in loops

## ✅ Definition of Done (Phase 3)
1) Training and validation loops implemented and configurable from YAML
2) Metrics computed per spec (TAES, AUROC, FA curves; sensitivity@{10,5,2.5,1})
3) Reproducible results with fixed seed
4) Checkpointing + early stopping honoring config
5) Logging via TensorBoard; optional W&B
6) Quality gates green; tests passing (unit + smoke)

## 🔗 Config Alignment (matches schemas.py exactly)
- Optimizer: `training.optimizer=adamw`
- Scheduler: `training.scheduler.type=cosine`, `warmup_ratio`
- AMP: `training.mixed_precision=true|false`
- Clip: `training.gradient_clip` (float)
- Early stopping: `training.early_stopping.{patience, metric}`
- Post-processing: `postprocessing.hysteresis.{tau_on,tau_off}`, `morphology.kernel_size`
- Evaluation: `evaluation.{metrics,fa_rates}`
- Mamba conv: `model.mamba.conv_kernel` (NOT d_conv or mamba_d_conv)

---
Status: Ready for implementation (TDD-first) ✅
Estimated Time: 2–3 days
Owners: Training duo (eng + reviewer) 🔬🚀
