docs/ARCHITECTURE_STATUS_REPORT.md, before:

# V3 Architecture Status Report - Ready for Training

## ✅ **FULLY RESOLVED QUESTIONS**

### 1. **Dynamic Laplacian PE** ✅
- **Status**: IMPLEMENTED with numerical stability safeguards
- **Decision**: Dynamic PE enabled by default
- **Performance**: Only 10-20% slower than static
- **Stability**: Added regularization, NaN detection, fallback logic

### 2. **TCN vs STFT for Primary Encoder** ✅
- **Decision**: TCN remains primary encoder
- **Rationale**: Better for raw time-series, preserves phase information
- **Note**: STFT can be added as side-branch (separate feature)

### 3. **Bidirectional vs Unidirectional** ✅
- **Decision**: BiMamba2 (bidirectional) correct for our use case
- **Rationale**: 60s offline windows benefit from both directions
- **Future**: Can switch to causal for real-time deployment

### 4. **Node Stream Dimensionality** ✅
- **Current**: d_model=64 per electrode (19×64=1216 total)
- **Decision**: SUFFICIENT - exceeds V2's 512 dims
- **Future**: Can experiment with 128 for marginal gains

### 5. **Edge Feature Type** ✅
- **Current**: Scalar cosine similarity
- **Decision**: VALIDATED - EvoBrain also uses scalar edges
- **Rationale**: Edge Mamba learns temporal evolution from scalar

### 6. **GNN Architecture Choice** ✅
- **Current**: SSGConv with α=0.05
- **Decision**: APPROPRIATE for sparse EEG graphs
- **Rationale**: Strong self-loop prevents over-smoothing

### 7. **Edge Mamba Dimensionality** ✅
- **Current**: d_model=16
- **Decision**: SUFFICIENT - 16x expansion from scalar input
- **Rationale**: Temporal modeling matters more than dims

### 8. **Mamba2 vs Mamba1** ✅
- **Decision**: Mamba2 for efficiency
- **Benefits**: Better hardware utilization, same accuracy

### 9. **CUDA Alignment Issues** ✅
- **Status**: FIXED - no more Conv1d fallbacks
- **Solution**: Proper headdim calculation (d_model*2)/headdim = int

### 10. **Training Stability** ✅
- **NaN Issue**: FIXED with robust eigendecomposition
- **Mixed Precision**: Disabled for RTX 4090 stability
- **Gradient Clipping**: Set to 0.5

## ✅ **ADDITIONAL VALIDATED DECISIONS (From Literature)**

### 11. **Graph Sparsity k=3** ✅
- **Current**: top_k=3 (16% connectivity)
- **VALIDATION**: EvoBrain paper: "we set τ = 3 and the top-3 neighbors' edges were kept"
- **Decision**: OPTIMAL AS-IS - exact match with SOTA
- **Status**: No change needed

### 12. **GNN Temporal Processing (Vectorized)** ✅
- **Current**: Vectorized batch processing
- **VALIDATION**: EvoBrain proves "time-then-graph" architecture superior
- **Our Approach**: TCN+BiMamba (temporal) → GNN (spatial) follows proven pattern
- **Decision**: CORRECT - vectorization is just efficiency optimization

### 13. **Node Mamba Layers** ✅
- **Current**: 6 layers (same as edge stream)
- **Decision**: Appropriate depth for capacity
- **Note**: Matches successful EvoBrain architecture

## 🔴 **FEATURE ADDITIONS (Optional but Recommended)**

### 1. **STFT Side-Branch**
- **Status**: NOT IMPLEMENTED (optional feature)
- **Impact**: +2-3% AUROC expected
- **Effort**: ~30 lines of code
- **Decision**: Implement as separate feature branch after baseline

## 📊 **ARCHITECTURE VALIDATION**

### **What We Do BETTER Than EvoBrain:**
1. **Bidirectional processing** (vs unidirectional)
2. **Full temporal GNN** (vs last timestep only)
3. **TCN encoder** (vs STFT for raw signals)
4. **Mamba2** (vs Mamba1)

### **What We Match:**
1. **Dual-stream architecture**
2. **Dynamic PE** (now implemented)
3. **Scalar edge features**
4. **O(N) complexity**

### **What We Could Add:**
1. **STFT side-branch** (optional enhancement)

## 🎯 **TRAINING READINESS CHECKLIST**

✅ **Core Architecture:**
- [x] V3 dual-stream implemented
- [x] Dynamic PE with stability safeguards
- [x] CUDA alignment fixed
- [x] NaN issues resolved
- [x] All configs updated

✅ **Stability:**
- [x] Eigendecomposition regularized
- [x] Fallback mechanisms in place
- [x] Gradient clipping enabled
- [x] Mixed precision disabled (RTX 4090)

✅ **Performance:**
- [x] O(N) complexity maintained
- [x] Vectorized operations
- [x] Efficient batching

## 📋 **FINAL ANSWER: ALL QUESTIONS RESOLVED**

**Every architectural question has been answered and validated:**

### **Resolved through Implementation:**
- ✅ Dynamic PE with stability safeguards
- ✅ CUDA alignment fixed
- ✅ NaN issues resolved
- ✅ Training stability achieved

### **Validated through Literature:**
- ✅ Graph sparsity k=3 (EvoBrain exact match)
- ✅ GNN temporal processing (time-then-graph proven)
- ✅ Scalar edge features (EvoBrain validation)
- ✅ All other design choices confirmed

The architecture is:
1. **Theoretically sound** - Matches/exceeds EvoBrain design
2. **Numerically stable** - All stability issues fixed
3. **Computationally efficient** - O(N) with vectorization
4. **Literature validated** - All choices backed by papers
5. **Ready for training** - Zero blocking issues

**Only remaining item:** Optional STFT side-branch (+2-3% AUROC) can be added in feature branch.

## 🚀 **RECOMMENDED NEXT STEPS**

### **Immediate Action:**
```bash
# Start full V3 training NOW - everything is ready
.venv/bin/python -m src train configs/local/train.yaml
```

### **Optional Enhancement:**
```bash
# In parallel feature branch if desired
git checkout -b feature/stft-sidebranch
# Implement from STFT_SIDEBRANCH_IMPLEMENTATION.md
```

### **Monitor During Training:**
1. **Stability** - Especially past batch 28 (where NaN occurred before)
2. **Metrics** - AUROC, sensitivity, FA rate
3. **Dynamic PE** - Check fallback triggers in logs

**Bottom Line: The V3 architecture is COMPLETE, VALIDATED, and READY for full production training.**

Commit message:

docs(test): add comprehensive test suite fix summary
- Introduced a new document summarizing fixes to the test suite, ensuring all tests now pass with improved reliability and performance.
- Addressed critical issues such as static positional encoding attribute handling and brittleness in the test suite, implementing memory-safe configurations and timeout adjustments.
- Enhanced test execution commands and configurations, promoting best practices in software engineering and clean code principles.
- Documented performance improvements, including reduced test times and stable memory usage, while outlining remaining optimization opportunities.

docs/ARCHITECTURE_STATUS_REPORT.md, after:

# V3 Architecture Status Report - Ready for Training

> Archived note: This document has been consolidated into the 0X SSOT.
> See `docs/04-model/v3-architecture.md` and `docs/00-overview/architecture-summary.md`.
> For a full mapping, refer to `docs/ARCHIVE_MAPPING.md`.

## ✅ **FULLY RESOLVED QUESTIONS**

### 1. **Dynamic Laplacian PE** ✅
- **Status**: IMPLEMENTED with numerical stability safeguards
- **Decision**: Dynamic PE enabled by default
- **Performance**: Only 10-20% slower than static
- **Stability**: Added regularization, NaN detection, fallback logic

### 2. **TCN vs STFT for Primary Encoder** ✅
- **Decision**: TCN remains primary encoder
- **Rationale**: Better for raw time-series, preserves phase information
- **Note**: STFT can be added as side-branch (separate feature)

### 3. **Bidirectional vs Unidirectional** ✅
- **Decision**: BiMamba2 (bidirectional) correct for our use case
- **Rationale**: 60s offline windows benefit from both directions
- **Future**: Can switch to causal for real-time deployment

### 4. **Node Stream Dimensionality** ✅
- **Current**: d_model=64 per electrode (19×64=1216 total)
- **Decision**: SUFFICIENT - exceeds V2's 512 dims
- **Future**: Can experiment with 128 for marginal gains

### 5. **Edge Feature Type** ✅
- **Current**: Scalar cosine similarity
- **Decision**: VALIDATED - EvoBrain also uses scalar edges
- **Rationale**: Edge Mamba learns temporal evolution from scalar

### 6. **GNN Architecture Choice** ✅
- **Current**: SSGConv with α=0.05
- **Decision**: APPROPRIATE for sparse EEG graphs
- **Rationale**: Strong self-loop prevents over-smoothing

### 7. **Edge Mamba Dimensionality** ✅
- **Current**: d_model=16
- **Decision**: SUFFICIENT - 16x expansion from scalar input
- **Rationale**: Temporal modeling matters more than dims

### 8. **Mamba2 vs Mamba1** ✅
- **Decision**: Mamba2 for efficiency
- **Benefits**: Better hardware utilization, same accuracy

### 9. **CUDA Alignment Issues** ✅
- **Status**: FIXED - no more Conv1d fallbacks
- **Solution**: Proper headdim calculation (d_model*2)/headdim = int

### 10. **Training Stability** ✅
- **NaN Issue**: FIXED with robust eigendecomposition
- **Mixed Precision**: Disabled for RTX 4090 stability
- **Gradient Clipping**: Set to 0.5

## ✅ **ADDITIONAL VALIDATED DECISIONS (From Literature)**

### 11. **Graph Sparsity k=3** ✅
- **Current**: top_k=3 (16% connectivity)
- **VALIDATION**: EvoBrain paper: "we set τ = 3 and the top-3 neighbors' edges were kept"
- **Decision**: OPTIMAL AS-IS - exact match with SOTA
- **Status**: No change needed

### 12. **GNN Temporal Processing (Vectorized)** ✅
- **Current**: Vectorized batch processing
- **VALIDATION**: EvoBrain proves "time-then-graph" architecture superior
- **Our Approach**: TCN+BiMamba (temporal) → GNN (spatial) follows proven pattern
- **Decision**: CORRECT - vectorization is just efficiency optimization

### 13. **Node Mamba Layers** ✅
- **Current**: 6 layers (same as edge stream)
- **Decision**: Appropriate depth for capacity
- **Note**: Matches successful EvoBrain architecture

## 🔴 **FEATURE ADDITIONS (Optional but Recommended)**

### 1. **STFT Side-Branch**
- **Status**: NOT IMPLEMENTED (optional feature)
- **Impact**: +2-3% AUROC expected
- **Effort**: ~30 lines of code
- **Decision**: Implement as separate feature branch after baseline

## 📊 **ARCHITECTURE VALIDATION**

### **What We Do BETTER Than EvoBrain:**
1. **Bidirectional processing** (vs unidirectional)
2. **Full temporal GNN** (vs last timestep only)
3. **TCN encoder** (vs STFT for raw signals)
4. **Mamba2** (vs Mamba1)

### **What We Match:**
1. **Dual-stream architecture**
2. **Dynamic PE** (now implemented)
3. **Scalar edge features**
4. **O(N) complexity**

### **What We Could Add:**
1. **STFT side-branch** (optional enhancement)

## 🎯 **TRAINING READINESS CHECKLIST**

✅ **Core Architecture:**
- [x] V3 dual-stream implemented
- [x] Dynamic PE with stability safeguards
- [x] CUDA alignment fixed
- [x] NaN issues resolved
- [x] All configs updated

✅ **Stability:**
- [x] Eigendecomposition regularized
- [x] Fallback mechanisms in place
- [x] Gradient clipping enabled
- [x] Mixed precision disabled (RTX 4090)

✅ **Performance:**
- [x] O(N) complexity maintained
- [x] Vectorized operations
- [x] Efficient batching

## 📋 **FINAL ANSWER: ALL QUESTIONS RESOLVED**

**Every architectural question has been answered and validated:**

### **Resolved through Implementation:**
- ✅ Dynamic PE with stability safeguards
- ✅ CUDA alignment fixed
- ✅ NaN issues resolved
- ✅ Training stability achieved

### **Validated through Literature:**
- ✅ Graph sparsity k=3 (EvoBrain exact match)
- ✅ GNN temporal processing (time-then-graph proven)
- ✅ Scalar edge features (EvoBrain validation)
- ✅ All other design choices confirmed

The architecture is:
1. **Theoretically sound** - Matches/exceeds EvoBrain design
2. **Numerically stable** - All stability issues fixed
3. **Computationally efficient** - O(N) with vectorization
4. **Literature validated** - All choices backed by papers
5. **Ready for training** - Zero blocking issues

**Only remaining item:** Optional STFT side-branch (+2-3% AUROC) can be added in feature branch.

## 🚀 **RECOMMENDED NEXT STEPS**

### **Immediate Action:**
```bash
# Start full V3 training NOW - everything is ready
.venv/bin/python -m src train configs/local/train.yaml
```

### **Optional Enhancement:**
```bash
# In parallel feature branch if desired
git checkout -b feature/stft-sidebranch
# Implement from STFT_SIDEBRANCH_IMPLEMENTATION.md
```

### **Monitor During Training:**
1. **Stability** - Especially past batch 28 (where NaN occurred before)
2. **Metrics** - AUROC, sensitivity, FA rate
3. **Dynamic PE** - Check fallback triggers in logs

**Bottom Line: The V3 architecture is COMPLETE, VALIDATED, and READY for full production training.**
