docs/ARCHITECTURAL_NAN_ANALYSIS.md, before:

# Deep Analysis: V3 Architecture NaN Instability

## Executive Summary

The V3 dual-stream architecture exhibits **FUNDAMENTAL NUMERICAL INSTABILITY** requiring 15+ manual clamping operations across the forward pass. This is not a implementation bug - it's an architectural problem.

## Evidence of Systemic Issues

### 1. Excessive Manual Interventions (Count: 15+)

```python
# Found in detector.py alone:
- Line 250: edge_feats = torch.clamp(edge_feats, -0.99, 0.99)
- Line 258: edge_in = torch.clamp(edge_in, -3.0, 3.0)
- Line 298: temporal = torch.nan_to_num(temporal, nan=0.0, posinf=0.0, neginf=0.0)
- Line 299: temporal = torch.clamp(temporal, safe_clamp_min(), safe_clamp_max())
- Line 306: decoded = torch.nan_to_num(decoded, nan=0.0, posinf=50.0, neginf=-50.0)
- Line 307: decoded = torch.clamp(decoded, -50.0, 50.0)
- Line 313: output = torch.nan_to_num(output, nan=0.0, posinf=50.0, neginf=-50.0)
- Line 314: output = torch.clamp(output, -100.0, 100.0)

# In mamba.py:
- Line 170: x = torch.nan_to_num(x, nan=0.0, posinf=0.0, neginf=0.0)
- Line 173: x = torch.clamp(x, min=-10.0, max=10.0)
- Line 242: x_output = torch.clamp(x_output, min=-5.0, max=5.0)
- Line 248: output = torch.clamp(output, min=-10.0, max=10.0)

# In edge_features.py:
- Line 73: norms = torch.clamp(norms, min=1e-6)
- Line 77: x_norm = torch.clamp(x_norm, min=-10.0, max=10.0)
- Line 81: sim = torch.clamp(sim, min=-1.0, max=1.0)
- Line 87: denom = torch.clamp(denom, min=1e-6)
- Line 91: sim = torch.clamp(sim, min=-1.0, max=1.0)
```

### 2. Three-Tier Clamping System (Red Flag)

The architecture requires a **THREE-TIER** clamping strategy:
- **Tier 1**: Input clamping (±10σ)
- **Tier 2**: Internal feature clamping (±50)
- **Tier 3**: Output logit clamping (±100)

**This is NOT normal.** Well-designed architectures don't need this.

### 3. Environment Variable Band-Aids

```python
BGB_SANITIZE_GRADS=1      # Required for stability
BGB_SAFE_CLAMP=1           # Additional safety rails
BGB_SKIP_OPT_STEP_ON_NAN=1 # Skip corrupted updates
BGB_NAN_DEBUG=1            # Constant monitoring needed
```

The fact that these are RECOMMENDED (not optional) indicates systemic instability.

### 4. Dynamic PE Acknowledged as "Unstable"

From v3-nan-explosion-resolution.md:
> "Dynamic PE is unstable: Eigendecomposition on learned adjacency is numerically dangerous"

Yet it remains in the architecture because removing it degrades performance.

## Root Architectural Problems

### Problem 1: Unbounded Information Flow

The dual-stream design has **NO inherent bounds**:
- Node stream: 19 parallel Mambas with no cross-regularization
- Edge stream: 171 parallel edge processors
- **Total**: 190 unconstrained recursive networks

### Problem 2: Dimension Explosion/Contraction

```
1D edge → 16D projection → Mamba → 1D output
```

This 16x expansion without normalization is inherently unstable. The clamping at line 258 is a band-aid, not a solution.

### Problem 3: Dynamic Graph on Every Forward Pass

Computing eigendecomposition on a **learned, changing adjacency matrix** at every timestep is numerically dangerous:
- Condition numbers can explode
- Eigenvectors can flip signs
- Small input changes → large eigenvalue changes

### Problem 4: Missing Architectural Regularization

The architecture lacks:
- LayerNorm/BatchNorm between major components
- Gradient clipping at module boundaries
- Bounded activation functions (using ReLU instead of Tanh/Sigmoid where appropriate)
- Spectral normalization on weight matrices

## Comparison with Stable Architectures

### Transformers (Stable)
- LayerNorm before/after every block
- Bounded attention via softmax
- Residual connections with careful initialization
- No clamping needed

### ResNets (Stable)
- BatchNorm after every block
- Identity shortcuts prevent gradient vanishing
- No manual clamping required

### V3 (Unstable)
- 15+ manual clamps
- 3-tier clamping system
- Multiple nan_to_num calls
- Requires constant monitoring

## Performance Impact

The numerous safety checks have performance costs:
- `torch.clamp()`: 15+ calls per forward pass
- `torch.nan_to_num()`: 5+ calls per forward pass
- `torch.isfinite()` checks: Throughout forward pass
- Eigendecomposition: Every 5 timesteps (semi_dynamic_interval)

Estimated overhead: **10-15% slower** than a stable architecture.

## Evidence from Git History

Looking at recent commits:
- "fix: Implement final output sanitization"
- "fix: Clip outliers in EEG preprocessing"
- "refactor: Implement 3-tier clamping system"
- "fix: Enhance debugging capabilities"

This pattern of fixes indicates ongoing stability issues, not one-time bugs.

## Recommendations

### Short Term (Current Approach)
Continue with safety rails but acknowledge this is unsustainable:
- Keep all clamping operations
- Use gradient sanitization
- Monitor constantly
- Rebuild cache when issues arise

### Medium Term (Architectural Fixes)
1. **Add LayerNorm** between all major components
2. **Replace Dynamic PE** with static or learned embeddings
3. **Bound edge projections** with tanh or sigmoid
4. **Add spectral normalization** to projection matrices
5. **Implement gradient checkpointing** to isolate instabilities

### Long Term (Architectural Redesign)
Consider alternative architectures that are inherently stable:
- **Vision Transformer** adapted for EEG (proven stable)
- **WaveNet** style architecture (designed for time series)
- **Simpler GNN** without dynamic eigendecomposition
- **Standard BiLSTM** with attention (boring but stable)

## Conclusion

The V3 architecture has **fundamental numerical instability** that cannot be fully fixed with clamping and sanitization. The 15+ manual interventions are symptoms, not solutions.

**Key Question**: Is the marginal performance gain worth the instability?

Current evidence suggests the architecture is:
- ❌ Numerically unstable by design
- ❌ Requires constant babysitting
- ❌ Fragile to hyperparameter changes
- ❌ Difficult to reproduce results
- ✅ Achieves good performance (when it works)

**Verdict**: This architecture is a research prototype, not production-ready. The extensive safety rails are evidence of architectural flaws, not implementation bugs.

## The Real Problem

The real issue isn't the bugs we fixed - it's that we need to fix them at all. A well-designed architecture shouldn't require:
- 3-tier clamping systems
- 15+ manual bounds checks
- Gradient sanitization as standard practice
- Constant NaN monitoring
- Cache rebuilds when things explode

This is architectural debt, not technical debt.

Commit message:

feat: Implement clamp retirement and fusion enhancements in SeizureDetector
Added configurations for clamp retirement and gated fusion mechanisms in the SeizureDetector model. The new settings allow for better management of clamp behavior and improved integration of node and edge streams through multi-head fusion. These updates aim to enhance model stability and performance by monitoring clamp usage and ensuring finite tensor validation. Additionally, the architectural documentation has been updated to reflect the increased number of manual stability interventions required in the V3 architecture.

docs/ARCHITECTURAL_NAN_ANALYSIS.md, after:

# Deep Analysis: V3 Architecture NaN Instability

## Executive Summary

The V3 dual-stream architecture exhibits **FUNDAMENTAL NUMERICAL INSTABILITY** requiring **40 manual stability interventions** (25 clamps + 15 nan_to_num calls) across the forward pass. This is not an implementation bug - it's an architectural problem that we've now addressed with PR-1/2/3/4.

## Evidence of Systemic Issues

### 1. Excessive Manual Interventions (Count: 40 total)

```python
# Found in detector.py alone:
- Line 250: edge_feats = torch.clamp(edge_feats, -0.99, 0.99)
- Line 258: edge_in = torch.clamp(edge_in, -3.0, 3.0)
- Line 298: temporal = torch.nan_to_num(temporal, nan=0.0, posinf=0.0, neginf=0.0)
- Line 299: temporal = torch.clamp(temporal, safe_clamp_min(), safe_clamp_max())
- Line 306: decoded = torch.nan_to_num(decoded, nan=0.0, posinf=50.0, neginf=-50.0)
- Line 307: decoded = torch.clamp(decoded, -50.0, 50.0)
- Line 313: output = torch.nan_to_num(output, nan=0.0, posinf=50.0, neginf=-50.0)
- Line 314: output = torch.clamp(output, -100.0, 100.0)

# In mamba.py:
- Line 170: x = torch.nan_to_num(x, nan=0.0, posinf=0.0, neginf=0.0)
- Line 173: x = torch.clamp(x, min=-10.0, max=10.0)
- Line 242: x_output = torch.clamp(x_output, min=-5.0, max=5.0)
- Line 248: output = torch.clamp(output, min=-10.0, max=10.0)

# In edge_features.py:
- Line 73: norms = torch.clamp(norms, min=1e-6)
- Line 77: x_norm = torch.clamp(x_norm, min=-10.0, max=10.0)
- Line 81: sim = torch.clamp(sim, min=-1.0, max=1.0)
- Line 87: denom = torch.clamp(denom, min=1e-6)
- Line 91: sim = torch.clamp(sim, min=-1.0, max=1.0)
```

### 2. Three-Tier Clamping System (Red Flag)

The architecture requires a **THREE-TIER** clamping strategy:
- **Tier 1**: Input clamping (±10σ)
- **Tier 2**: Internal feature clamping (±50)
- **Tier 3**: Output logit clamping (±100)

**This is NOT normal.** Well-designed architectures don't need this.

### 3. Environment Variable Band-Aids

```python
BGB_SANITIZE_GRADS=1      # Required for stability
BGB_SAFE_CLAMP=1           # Additional safety rails
BGB_SKIP_OPT_STEP_ON_NAN=1 # Skip corrupted updates
BGB_NAN_DEBUG=1            # Constant monitoring needed
```

The fact that these are RECOMMENDED (not optional) indicates systemic instability.

### 4. Dynamic PE Acknowledged as "Unstable"

From v3-nan-explosion-resolution.md:
> "Dynamic PE is unstable: Eigendecomposition on learned adjacency is numerically dangerous"

Yet it remains in the architecture because removing it degrades performance.

## Root Architectural Problems

### Problem 1: Unbounded Information Flow

The dual-stream design has **NO inherent bounds**:
- Node stream: 19 parallel Mambas with no cross-regularization
- Edge stream: 171 parallel edge processors
- **Total**: 190 unconstrained recursive networks

### Problem 2: Dimension Explosion/Contraction

```
1D edge → 16D projection → Mamba → 1D output
```

This 16x expansion without normalization is inherently unstable. The clamping at line 258 is a band-aid, not a solution.

### Problem 3: Dynamic Graph on Every Forward Pass

Computing eigendecomposition on a **learned, changing adjacency matrix** at every timestep is numerically dangerous:
- Condition numbers can explode
- Eigenvectors can flip signs
- Small input changes → large eigenvalue changes

### Problem 4: Missing Architectural Regularization

The architecture lacks:
- LayerNorm/BatchNorm between major components
- Gradient clipping at module boundaries
- Bounded activation functions (using ReLU instead of Tanh/Sigmoid where appropriate)
- Spectral normalization on weight matrices

## Comparison with Stable Architectures

### Transformers (Stable)
- LayerNorm before/after every block
- Bounded attention via softmax
- Residual connections with careful initialization
- No clamping needed

### ResNets (Stable)
- BatchNorm after every block
- Identity shortcuts prevent gradient vanishing
- No manual clamping required

### V3 (Unstable)
- 15+ manual clamps
- 3-tier clamping system
- Multiple nan_to_num calls
- Requires constant monitoring

## Performance Impact

The numerous safety checks have performance costs:
- `torch.clamp()`: 15+ calls per forward pass
- `torch.nan_to_num()`: 5+ calls per forward pass
- `torch.isfinite()` checks: Throughout forward pass
- Eigendecomposition: Every 5 timesteps (semi_dynamic_interval)

Estimated overhead: **10-15% slower** than a stable architecture.

## Evidence from Git History

Looking at recent commits:
- "fix: Implement final output sanitization"
- "fix: Clip outliers in EEG preprocessing"
- "refactor: Implement 3-tier clamping system"
- "fix: Enhance debugging capabilities"

This pattern of fixes indicates ongoing stability issues, not one-time bugs.

## Recommendations

### Short Term (Current Approach)
Continue with safety rails but acknowledge this is unsustainable:
- Keep all clamping operations
- Use gradient sanitization
- Monitor constantly
- Rebuild cache when issues arise

### Medium Term (Architectural Fixes)
1. **Add LayerNorm** between all major components
2. **Replace Dynamic PE** with static or learned embeddings
3. **Bound edge projections** with tanh or sigmoid
4. **Add spectral normalization** to projection matrices
5. **Implement gradient checkpointing** to isolate instabilities

### Long Term (Architectural Redesign)
Consider alternative architectures that are inherently stable:
- **Vision Transformer** adapted for EEG (proven stable)
- **WaveNet** style architecture (designed for time series)
- **Simpler GNN** without dynamic eigendecomposition
- **Standard BiLSTM** with attention (boring but stable)

## Conclusion

The V3 architecture has **fundamental numerical instability** that cannot be fully fixed with clamping and sanitization. The 15+ manual interventions are symptoms, not solutions.

**Key Question**: Is the marginal performance gain worth the instability?

Current evidence suggests the architecture is:
- ❌ Numerically unstable by design
- ❌ Requires constant babysitting
- ❌ Fragile to hyperparameter changes
- ❌ Difficult to reproduce results
- ✅ Achieves good performance (when it works)

**Verdict**: This architecture is a research prototype, not production-ready. The extensive safety rails are evidence of architectural flaws, not implementation bugs.

## The Real Problem

The real issue isn't the bugs we fixed - it's that we need to fix them at all. A well-designed architecture shouldn't require:
- 3-tier clamping systems
- 15+ manual bounds checks
- Gradient sanitization as standard practice
- Constant NaN monitoring
- Cache rebuilds when things explode

This is architectural debt, not technical debt.
