docs/GNN_LPE_CRITICAL_ANALYSIS.md, before:

# 🔴 CRITICAL: GNN+LPE Implementation Analysis & Complete Fix Plan

## Executive Summary
**CONFIRMED BUG**: Our GNN+LPE has 3 catastrophic performance bugs causing 30-40s/batch slowdowns. After analyzing EvoBrain reference implementation, the architecture is conceptually correct but implementation violates GPU batching principles. **100% FIXABLE** with vectorization.

## Current Status (v2.6)
```
TCN → Bi-Mamba → [BROKEN GNN+LPE] → Projection → Detection
         ↑              ↑
    (Working)    THIS IS THE PROBLEM

MISSING: Edge Bi-Mamba stream (v3.0 feature)
```

### What We Have:
- ✅ TCN encoder (working, replaced U-Net successfully)
- ✅ Bi-Mamba temporal modeling (working, O(N) complexity)
- ✅ PyG GNN with Laplacian PE (integrated but broken)
- ❌ **3 CRITICAL PERFORMANCE BUGS** (see below)
- ❌ Missing edge Bi-Mamba stream (planned for v3.0)

## 🔥 THREE CRITICAL BUGS IDENTIFIED (Confirmed via EvoBrain Analysis)

### Bug #1: Eigendecomposition in Nested Loops (O(N³) × B × T)
**Location**: `src/brain_brr/models/gnn_pyg.py:127-140`

**What's happening**:
- Computing eigendecomposition for EVERY sample at EVERY timestep
- Total computations per batch: 12 × 960 = **11,520 eigendecompositions**
- Each eigendecomposition: O(19³) = 6,859 operations
- **Total waste: 79M operations that should be 6,859 (11,520x overhead)**

**Current broken code**:
```python
# Line 127-140: DISASTER ZONE
for b in range(batch_size):  # 12 iterations
    for t in range(seq_len):  # 960 iterations
        with torch.no_grad():
            data_for_pe = Data(...)
            data_for_pe = self.laplacian_pe(data_for_pe)  # O(N³) HERE!
```

**EvoBrain solution**: Compute PE once per sample using LAST timestep only

### Bug #2: Python Loops Instead of GPU Vectorization
**Location**: `src/brain_brr/models/gnn_pyg.py:102-103`

**What's happening**:
```python
for t in range(seq_len):  # 960 SEQUENTIAL Python iterations!
    # CPU-bound Python object creation
    # GPU sits idle waiting for Python
```

**Performance impact**:
- Python loop overhead: ~0.1ms × 960 = 96ms wasted
- GPU idle time: 95% (GPU waits for Python to create objects)
- Should be: Single batched GPU operation (~1ms)

**EvoBrain approach**: Process B×T graphs as single disjoint union

### Bug #3: Creating 11,520 PyG Data Objects Per Forward Pass
**Location**: `src/brain_brr/models/gnn_pyg.py:110-141`

**What's happening**:
```python
for b in range(batch_size):     # 12 iterations
    for t in range(seq_len):     # 960 iterations
        data = Data(             # Creating Python object!
            x=node_features,
            edge_index=edge_index,
            edge_attr=edge_attr
        )
```

**Performance disaster**:
- Objects created: 12 × 960 = 11,520 Data() instances
- Memory allocations: 11,520 (should be 1)
- Python GC pressure: Extreme

**EvoBrain solution**: Single edge_index tensor with node offsets

## 📊 Performance Analysis (Verified Against EvoBrain)

### Current Performance Breakdown (30-40s/batch)
| Operation | Time | % of Total | Should Be |
|-----------|------|------------|-----------|
| Eigendecomposition loops | ~25s | 70% | 0.01s |
| Python object creation | ~10s | 25% | 0.001s |
| Actual GNN computation | ~2s | 5% | 2s |
| **Total** | **37s** | 100% | **2s** |

### After Fix (Projected)
| Operation | Time | Speedup |
|-----------|------|---------|
| Static PE lookup | 0.001s | 25,000x |
| Vectorized batching | 0.01s | 1,000x |
| GNN computation | 2s | 1x |
| **Total** | **2s** | **18.5x** |

## ✅ COMPLETE FIX PLAN (Based on EvoBrain Analysis)

### Phase 1: Immediate Fixes (2-3 hours)

#### Fix 1: Static Laplacian PE Buffer
```python
class GraphChannelMixer(nn.Module):
    def __init__(self, ...):
        super().__init__()
        # PRECOMPUTE PE ONCE
        self.register_buffer('static_pe', self._compute_canonical_pe())

    def _compute_canonical_pe(self):
        """Compute PE for standard 19-electrode montage"""
        # Build canonical adjacency (distance-based)
        positions = STANDARD_10_20_POSITIONS  # From constants
        adj = compute_distance_adjacency(positions, threshold=0.3)

        # Compute Laplacian eigendecomposition ONCE
        L = normalized_laplacian(adj)
        eigenvalues, eigenvectors = torch.linalg.eigh(L)
        return eigenvectors[:, :self.k_eigenvectors]  # (19, k)

    def forward(self, x):
        B, T, N, D = x.shape
        # Broadcast static PE to all samples/timesteps
        pe = self.static_pe.unsqueeze(0).unsqueeze(0)  # (1, 1, 19, k)
        pe = pe.expand(B, T, -1, -1)  # (B, T, 19, k)

        # Concatenate with features
        x_with_pe = torch.cat([x, pe], dim=-1)  # (B, T, 19, D+k)
        # ... rest of GNN processing
```

#### Fix 2: Vectorized Disjoint Graph Processing
```python
def forward(self, x, adjacency):
    B, T, N, D = x.shape

    # Flatten batch and time dimensions
    x_flat = x.reshape(B*T, N, D)  # (B*T, 19, D)
    adj_flat = adjacency.reshape(B*T, N, N)  # (B*T, 19, 19)

    # Build SINGLE disjoint graph for all B*T subgraphs
    edge_index, edge_weight = build_disjoint_edge_index(adj_flat)

    # Add node batch assignment
    batch = torch.arange(B*T).repeat_interleave(N).to(x.device)

    # Single GNN forward pass
    out = self.gnn_layers(x_flat, edge_index, edge_weight, batch)

    # Reshape back
    out = out.reshape(B, T, N, -1)
    return out

def build_disjoint_edge_index(adj_flat):
    """Build edge index for disjoint union of graphs"""
    BT, N, _ = adj_flat.shape

    # Get all edges at once
    edges = torch.nonzero(adj_flat > 0.01)  # (num_edges, 3)
    graph_id, src, dst = edges.T

    # Offset node indices by graph ID
    src_global = graph_id * N + src
    dst_global = graph_id * N + dst

    edge_index = torch.stack([src_global, dst_global])
    edge_weight = adj_flat[graph_id, src, dst]

    return edge_index, edge_weight
```

#### Fix 3: Remove All Python Loops
```python
class GraphChannelMixer(nn.Module):
    def forward(self, x, adjacency=None):
        B, T, N, D = x.shape

        # NO LOOPS - pure tensor operations
        if adjacency is None:
            adjacency = self.build_default_adjacency(B, T, N)

        # Add static PE
        pe = self.static_pe.unsqueeze(0).unsqueeze(0).expand(B, T, -1, -1)
        x = torch.cat([x, pe], dim=-1)

        # Flatten and process
        x_flat = x.reshape(B*T, N, -1)
        edge_index, edge_weight = self.build_batched_edges(adjacency)

        # Single batched GNN forward
        out = self.conv1(x_flat, edge_index, edge_weight)
        out = F.relu(out)
        out = self.conv2(out, edge_index, edge_weight)

        # Reshape
        return out.reshape(B, T, N, -1)
```

### Phase 2: Architecture Enhancement (v3.0 - Later)

#### Add Edge Bi-Mamba Stream
```python
class EdgeTemporalStream(nn.Module):
    """Learn dynamic adjacency via edge features"""
    def __init__(self, d_model=64, n_edges=171):  # 19*18/2 edges
        self.edge_mamba = BiMamba2(
            d_model=d_model,
            d_state=16,
            d_conv=4,
            n_layers=2
        )
        self.edge_to_adj = nn.Linear(d_model, 1)

    def forward(self, x):
        # Extract edge features (e.g., cross-correlation)
        edge_features = compute_edge_features(x)  # (B, E, T, D)

        # Process temporally
        edge_embeds = self.edge_mamba(edge_features)  # (B, E, T, D)

        # Convert to adjacency
        edge_weights = self.edge_to_adj(edge_embeds).sigmoid()  # (B, E, T, 1)
        adjacency = edges_to_adjacency(edge_weights)  # (B, T, N, N)

        return adjacency
```

## 🧪 Test-Driven Development Plan

### Step 1: Write Performance Tests FIRST
```python
# tests/unit/models/test_gnn_performance.py
import pytest
import torch
import time
from src.brain_brr.models.gnn_pyg import GraphChannelMixer

class TestGNNPerformance:
    @pytest.mark.gpu
    def test_forward_pass_under_100ms(self):
        """GNN forward must complete in <100ms for batch of 12"""
        model = GraphChannelMixer(
            in_channels=512,
            hidden_channels=256,
            out_channels=512,
            num_eigenvectors=16
        ).cuda()

        # Typical batch
        x = torch.randn(12, 960, 19, 512).cuda()

        # Warmup
        _ = model(x)
        torch.cuda.synchronize()

        # Time it
        start = time.perf_counter()
        out = model(x)
        torch.cuda.synchronize()
        elapsed = time.perf_counter() - start

        assert elapsed < 0.1, f"Forward took {elapsed:.3f}s (>100ms)"
        assert out.shape == (12, 960, 19, 512)

    def test_no_eigendecomposition_in_forward(self):
        """Ensure no eigendecomposition happens during forward"""
        model = GraphChannelMixer(...)

        # Monkey-patch to detect calls
        original_eigh = torch.linalg.eigh
        call_count = 0

        def counting_eigh(*args, **kwargs):
            nonlocal call_count
            call_count += 1
            return original_eigh(*args, **kwargs)

        torch.linalg.eigh = counting_eigh

        try:
            x = torch.randn(2, 100, 19, 512)
            _ = model(x)
            assert call_count == 0, f"eigendecomposition called {call_count} times"
        finally:
            torch.linalg.eigh = original_eigh

    def test_static_pe_buffer_exists(self):
        """Verify static PE is precomputed"""
        model = GraphChannelMixer(...)
        assert hasattr(model, 'static_pe')
        assert model.static_pe.shape == (19, 16)
        assert model.static_pe.requires_grad == False
```

### Step 2: Fix Implementation to Pass Tests

### Step 3: Integration Tests
```python
def test_full_detector_performance():
    """End-to-end detector must process batch in <3s"""
    from src.brain_brr.models.detector import SeizureDetector

    model = SeizureDetector.from_config(config).cuda()
    x = torch.randn(12, 960, 19).cuda()

    start = time.perf_counter()
    out = model(x)
    elapsed = time.perf_counter() - start

    assert elapsed < 3.0, f"Detector took {elapsed:.1f}s"
```

## 🎯 Implementation Priority

### TODAY (Critical Path)
1. **Write performance tests** (30 min)
2. **Implement static PE buffer** (1 hour)
3. **Vectorize graph building** (1 hour)
4. **Remove Python loops** (30 min)
5. **Run tests & verify speedup** (30 min)

### THIS WEEK (Nice to Have)
1. Add edge temporal stream stub
2. Profile with NVIDIA Nsight
3. Optimize memory layout

### NEXT SPRINT (v3.0)
1. Full edge Bi-Mamba implementation
2. Dynamic graph learning
3. Adaptive PE options

## 💡 Key Insights from EvoBrain

1. **Time-then-Graph is Correct**: Process temporal features FIRST (Mamba), then spatial (GNN)
2. **PE Can Be Static**: For fixed electrode montages, PE never changes
3. **Vectorization is Essential**: Never loop in Python when processing batches
4. **Edge Streams Add Value**: But can be added later without breaking current arch

## 🚀 Expected Outcome

**Before Fix**:
- 30-40 seconds per batch
- 11,520 eigendecompositions
- 11,520 Data objects
- ~300 hours training time

**After Fix**:
- 2-3 seconds per batch
- 0 eigendecompositions
- 1 batched operation
- ~20 hours training time

## ✅ BOTTOM LINE

**The GNN+LPE implementation is 100% salvageable**. We don't need edge Bi-Mamba yet - just fixing the three performance bugs will give us 15-20x speedup. The conceptual architecture (TCN → Bi-Mamba → GNN → Detection) is sound and matches EvoBrain's proven approach.

**Immediate action**: Implement the three fixes above, then let training run efficiently!

Commit message:

docs: update setup instructions and configuration comments for V2 and V3
- Revised the Makefile to clarify GPU setup instructions for both v2.6 and V3 stacks.
- Updated README to reflect the installation of the GPU stack using prebuilt PyG wheels.
- Adjusted comments in local and modal configuration files to consistently refer to V2 and V3 architectures.
- Enhanced clarity in smoke and training configuration files regarding architecture options and requirements.

docs/GNN_LPE_CRITICAL_ANALYSIS.md, after:

# 🔴 CRITICAL: GNN+LPE Implementation Analysis (Historical) & Fix Plan

Note: This document captures the pre‑V3 state and the fix plan. As of now, V3 is implemented with vectorized GNN and static Laplacian PE, and the Edge Bi‑Mamba stream is implemented. See the ground‑truth: docs/architecture/V3_ACTUAL.md.

## Executive Summary
**CONFIRMED BUG**: Our GNN+LPE has 3 catastrophic performance bugs causing 30-40s/batch slowdowns. After analyzing EvoBrain reference implementation, the architecture is conceptually correct but implementation violates GPU batching principles. **100% FIXABLE** with vectorization.

## Historical Status (pre‑V3)
```
TCN → Bi-Mamba → [BROKEN GNN+LPE] → Projection → Detection
         ↑              ↑
    (Working)    THIS IS THE PROBLEM

Implemented in V3: Edge Bi‑Mamba stream (learned adjacency)
```

### What We Have:
- ✅ TCN encoder (working, replaced U-Net successfully)
- ✅ Bi-Mamba temporal modeling (working, O(N) complexity)
- ✅ PyG GNN with Laplacian PE (integrated but broken)
- ❌ 3 CRITICAL PERFORMANCE BUGS (fixed in V3 via vectorization + static PE)
- ✅ Edge Bi‑Mamba stream implemented in V3

## 🔥 THREE CRITICAL BUGS IDENTIFIED (Confirmed via EvoBrain Analysis)

### Bug #1: Eigendecomposition in Nested Loops (O(N³) × B × T)
**Location**: `src/brain_brr/models/gnn_pyg.py:127-140`

**What's happening**:
- Computing eigendecomposition for EVERY sample at EVERY timestep
- Total computations per batch: 12 × 960 = **11,520 eigendecompositions**
- Each eigendecomposition: O(19³) = 6,859 operations
- **Total waste: 79M operations that should be 6,859 (11,520x overhead)**

**Current broken code**:
```python
# Line 127-140: DISASTER ZONE
for b in range(batch_size):  # 12 iterations
    for t in range(seq_len):  # 960 iterations
        with torch.no_grad():
            data_for_pe = Data(...)
            data_for_pe = self.laplacian_pe(data_for_pe)  # O(N³) HERE!
```

**EvoBrain solution**: Compute PE once per sample using LAST timestep only

### Bug #2: Python Loops Instead of GPU Vectorization
**Location**: `src/brain_brr/models/gnn_pyg.py:102-103`

**What's happening**:
```python
for t in range(seq_len):  # 960 SEQUENTIAL Python iterations!
    # CPU-bound Python object creation
    # GPU sits idle waiting for Python
```

**Performance impact**:
- Python loop overhead: ~0.1ms × 960 = 96ms wasted
- GPU idle time: 95% (GPU waits for Python to create objects)
- Should be: Single batched GPU operation (~1ms)

**EvoBrain approach**: Process B×T graphs as single disjoint union

### Bug #3: Creating 11,520 PyG Data Objects Per Forward Pass
**Location**: `src/brain_brr/models/gnn_pyg.py:110-141`

**What's happening**:
```python
for b in range(batch_size):     # 12 iterations
    for t in range(seq_len):     # 960 iterations
        data = Data(             # Creating Python object!
            x=node_features,
            edge_index=edge_index,
            edge_attr=edge_attr
        )
```

**Performance disaster**:
- Objects created: 12 × 960 = 11,520 Data() instances
- Memory allocations: 11,520 (should be 1)
- Python GC pressure: Extreme

**EvoBrain solution**: Single edge_index tensor with node offsets

## 📊 Performance Analysis (Verified Against EvoBrain)

### Current Performance Breakdown (30-40s/batch)
| Operation | Time | % of Total | Should Be |
|-----------|------|------------|-----------|
| Eigendecomposition loops | ~25s | 70% | 0.01s |
| Python object creation | ~10s | 25% | 0.001s |
| Actual GNN computation | ~2s | 5% | 2s |
| **Total** | **37s** | 100% | **2s** |

### After Fix (Projected)
| Operation | Time | Speedup |
|-----------|------|---------|
| Static PE lookup | 0.001s | 25,000x |
| Vectorized batching | 0.01s | 1,000x |
| GNN computation | 2s | 1x |
| **Total** | **2s** | **18.5x** |

## ✅ COMPLETE FIX PLAN (Based on EvoBrain Analysis)

### Phase 1: Immediate Fixes (2-3 hours)

#### Fix 1: Static Laplacian PE Buffer
```python
class GraphChannelMixer(nn.Module):
    def __init__(self, ...):
        super().__init__()
        # PRECOMPUTE PE ONCE
        self.register_buffer('static_pe', self._compute_canonical_pe())

    def _compute_canonical_pe(self):
        """Compute PE for standard 19-electrode montage"""
        # Build canonical adjacency (distance-based)
        positions = STANDARD_10_20_POSITIONS  # From constants
        adj = compute_distance_adjacency(positions, threshold=0.3)

        # Compute Laplacian eigendecomposition ONCE
        L = normalized_laplacian(adj)
        eigenvalues, eigenvectors = torch.linalg.eigh(L)
        return eigenvectors[:, :self.k_eigenvectors]  # (19, k)

    def forward(self, x):
        B, T, N, D = x.shape
        # Broadcast static PE to all samples/timesteps
        pe = self.static_pe.unsqueeze(0).unsqueeze(0)  # (1, 1, 19, k)
        pe = pe.expand(B, T, -1, -1)  # (B, T, 19, k)

        # Concatenate with features
        x_with_pe = torch.cat([x, pe], dim=-1)  # (B, T, 19, D+k)
        # ... rest of GNN processing
```

#### Fix 2: Vectorized Disjoint Graph Processing
```python
def forward(self, x, adjacency):
    B, T, N, D = x.shape

    # Flatten batch and time dimensions
    x_flat = x.reshape(B*T, N, D)  # (B*T, 19, D)
    adj_flat = adjacency.reshape(B*T, N, N)  # (B*T, 19, 19)

    # Build SINGLE disjoint graph for all B*T subgraphs
    edge_index, edge_weight = build_disjoint_edge_index(adj_flat)

    # Add node batch assignment
    batch = torch.arange(B*T).repeat_interleave(N).to(x.device)

    # Single GNN forward pass
    out = self.gnn_layers(x_flat, edge_index, edge_weight, batch)

    # Reshape back
    out = out.reshape(B, T, N, -1)
    return out

def build_disjoint_edge_index(adj_flat):
    """Build edge index for disjoint union of graphs"""
    BT, N, _ = adj_flat.shape

    # Get all edges at once
    edges = torch.nonzero(adj_flat > 0.01)  # (num_edges, 3)
    graph_id, src, dst = edges.T

    # Offset node indices by graph ID
    src_global = graph_id * N + src
    dst_global = graph_id * N + dst

    edge_index = torch.stack([src_global, dst_global])
    edge_weight = adj_flat[graph_id, src, dst]

    return edge_index, edge_weight
```

#### Fix 3: Remove All Python Loops
```python
class GraphChannelMixer(nn.Module):
    def forward(self, x, adjacency=None):
        B, T, N, D = x.shape

        # NO LOOPS - pure tensor operations
        if adjacency is None:
            adjacency = self.build_default_adjacency(B, T, N)

        # Add static PE
        pe = self.static_pe.unsqueeze(0).unsqueeze(0).expand(B, T, -1, -1)
        x = torch.cat([x, pe], dim=-1)

        # Flatten and process
        x_flat = x.reshape(B*T, N, -1)
        edge_index, edge_weight = self.build_batched_edges(adjacency)

        # Single batched GNN forward
        out = self.conv1(x_flat, edge_index, edge_weight)
        out = F.relu(out)
        out = self.conv2(out, edge_index, edge_weight)

        # Reshape
        return out.reshape(B, T, N, -1)
```

### Phase 2: Architecture Enhancement (status: implemented in V3)

#### Add Edge Bi-Mamba Stream
```python
class EdgeTemporalStream(nn.Module):
    """Learn dynamic adjacency via edge features"""
    def __init__(self, d_model=64, n_edges=171):  # 19*18/2 edges
        self.edge_mamba = BiMamba2(
            d_model=d_model,
            d_state=16,
            d_conv=4,
            n_layers=2
        )
        self.edge_to_adj = nn.Linear(d_model, 1)

    def forward(self, x):
        # Extract edge features (e.g., cross-correlation)
        edge_features = compute_edge_features(x)  # (B, E, T, D)

        # Process temporally
        edge_embeds = self.edge_mamba(edge_features)  # (B, E, T, D)

        # Convert to adjacency
        edge_weights = self.edge_to_adj(edge_embeds).sigmoid()  # (B, E, T, 1)
        adjacency = edges_to_adjacency(edge_weights)  # (B, T, N, N)

        return adjacency
```

## 🧪 Test-Driven Development Plan

### Step 1: Write Performance Tests FIRST
```python
# tests/unit/models/test_gnn_performance.py
import pytest
import torch
import time
from src.brain_brr.models.gnn_pyg import GraphChannelMixer

class TestGNNPerformance:
    @pytest.mark.gpu
    def test_forward_pass_under_100ms(self):
        """GNN forward must complete in <100ms for batch of 12"""
        model = GraphChannelMixer(
            in_channels=512,
            hidden_channels=256,
            out_channels=512,
            num_eigenvectors=16
        ).cuda()

        # Typical batch
        x = torch.randn(12, 960, 19, 512).cuda()

        # Warmup
        _ = model(x)
        torch.cuda.synchronize()

        # Time it
        start = time.perf_counter()
        out = model(x)
        torch.cuda.synchronize()
        elapsed = time.perf_counter() - start

        assert elapsed < 0.1, f"Forward took {elapsed:.3f}s (>100ms)"
        assert out.shape == (12, 960, 19, 512)

    def test_no_eigendecomposition_in_forward(self):
        """Ensure no eigendecomposition happens during forward"""
        model = GraphChannelMixer(...)

        # Monkey-patch to detect calls
        original_eigh = torch.linalg.eigh
        call_count = 0

        def counting_eigh(*args, **kwargs):
            nonlocal call_count
            call_count += 1
            return original_eigh(*args, **kwargs)

        torch.linalg.eigh = counting_eigh

        try:
            x = torch.randn(2, 100, 19, 512)
            _ = model(x)
            assert call_count == 0, f"eigendecomposition called {call_count} times"
        finally:
            torch.linalg.eigh = original_eigh

    def test_static_pe_buffer_exists(self):
        """Verify static PE is precomputed"""
        model = GraphChannelMixer(...)
        assert hasattr(model, 'static_pe')
        assert model.static_pe.shape == (19, 16)
        assert model.static_pe.requires_grad == False
```

### Step 2: Fix Implementation to Pass Tests

### Step 3: Integration Tests
```python
def test_full_detector_performance():
    """End-to-end detector must process batch in <3s"""
    from src.brain_brr.models.detector import SeizureDetector

    model = SeizureDetector.from_config(config).cuda()
    x = torch.randn(12, 960, 19).cuda()

    start = time.perf_counter()
    out = model(x)
    elapsed = time.perf_counter() - start

    assert elapsed < 3.0, f"Detector took {elapsed:.1f}s"
```

## 🎯 Implementation Priority

### TODAY (Critical Path)
1. **Write performance tests** (30 min)
2. **Implement static PE buffer** (1 hour)
3. **Vectorize graph building** (1 hour)
4. **Remove Python loops** (30 min)
5. **Run tests & verify speedup** (30 min)

### THIS WEEK (Nice to Have)
1. Add edge temporal stream stub
2. Profile with NVIDIA Nsight
3. Optimize memory layout

### NEXT SPRINT (historical; V3 implemented)
1. Full edge Bi-Mamba implementation
2. Dynamic graph learning
3. Adaptive PE options

## 💡 Key Insights from EvoBrain

1. **Time-then-Graph is Correct**: Process temporal features FIRST (Mamba), then spatial (GNN)
2. **PE Can Be Static**: For fixed electrode montages, PE never changes
3. **Vectorization is Essential**: Never loop in Python when processing batches
4. **Edge Streams Add Value**: But can be added later without breaking current arch

## 🚀 Expected Outcome

**Before Fix**:
- 30-40 seconds per batch
- 11,520 eigendecompositions
- 11,520 Data objects
- ~300 hours training time

**After Fix**:
- 2-3 seconds per batch
- 0 eigendecompositions
- 1 batched operation
- ~20 hours training time

## ✅ BOTTOM LINE

**The GNN+LPE implementation is 100% salvageable**. We don't need edge Bi-Mamba yet - just fixing the three performance bugs will give us 15-20x speedup. The conceptual architecture (TCN → Bi-Mamba → GNN → Detection) is sound and matches EvoBrain's proven approach.

**Immediate action**: Implement the three fixes above, then let training run efficiently!
