docs/OOM_ROOT_CAUSE_ANALYSIS.md, before:

# P0: V3 Training OOM - Root Cause Analysis

## Executive Summary
**CRITICAL**: V3 training fails immediately (batch 1) with OOM on RTX 4090 (24GB).
- **Memory Used**: 14.44 GB allocated + 1.74 GB reserved = 16.18 GB
- **Trying to Allocate**: 1.34 GB additional
- **Total Needed**: ~17.5 GB for forward pass alone
- **Available**: Only 5.35 GB free

## Memory Breakdown from First Principles

### Input Tensor Sizes
```
Batch size: 8
Channels: 19
Time points: 15360 (60s @ 256Hz)

Input: (8, 19, 15360) = 23,500,800 floats
       = 94 MB (float32)
```

### V3 Architecture Memory Footprint

#### 1. TCN Encoder
```
8 layers, channels [64, 128, 256, 512]
Stride down: 16x → Output: (8, 512, 960)

Memory per layer (approx):
- Layer 1: (8, 64, 15360) = 7.9 MB
- Layer 2: (8, 128, 7680) = 7.9 MB
- Layer 3: (8, 256, 3840) = 7.9 MB
- Layer 4-8: (8, 512, 960) = 3.9 MB each

TCN Total: ~47 MB activations + ~10 MB parameters
```

#### 2. Dual-Stream BiMamba (THE PROBLEM)
```
Node Stream: 19 parallel BiMambas
- Input: (8, 19, 64, 960) per electrode
- 6 layers each
- Memory: 19 × (8 × 64 × 960 × 6 layers) × 4 bytes
        = 19 × 11.8 MB = 224 MB

Edge Stream: 171 edges (19×18/2)
- Input: (8, 171, 960, 1) → projected to d_model=16
- 6 layers
- Memory: 171 × (8 × 16 × 960 × 6 layers) × 4 bytes
        = 171 × 2.9 MB = 500 MB

State-space matrices (SSMs):
- Node: 19 × 6 layers × (512 × 16 state × 2) = 1.8 MB
- Edge: 6 layers × (16 × 16 state × 2) = 0.02 MB

BiMamba Total: ~724 MB
```

#### 3. Dynamic Laplacian PE (HUGE OVERHEAD)
```
Computing eigendecomposition for EVERY timestep:
- Adjacency: (8, 960, 19, 19) = 2.8 MB
- Laplacian: (8, 960, 19, 19) = 2.8 MB
- Eigendecomposition workspace: ~10x matrix size
- Eigenvectors: (8, 960, 19, 16) = 2.3 MB

Per-timestep eigendecomposition:
- 960 timesteps × 8 batches = 7,680 eigendecompositions
- CUDA workspace per decomp: ~1 MB
- Total workspace: 7.68 GB (!!)

Dynamic PE Total: ~7.7 GB
```

#### 4. GNN Processing (Vectorized)
```
Input reshape: (8×960×19, 64) = 1,167,360 × 64
             = 299 MB

Graph operations (2 layers):
- Message passing workspace
- Adjacency matrix operations
- Intermediate activations

GNN Total: ~600 MB
```

#### 5. Output Layers
```
Final projection: (8, 1, 15360) = 0.5 MB
```

### Total Memory Analysis

| Component | Memory (MB) | Memory (GB) |
|-----------|------------|-------------|
| Input | 94 | 0.09 |
| TCN | 47 | 0.05 |
| **Dual BiMamba** | **724** | **0.71** |
| **Dynamic PE** | **7,700** | **7.50** |
| **GNN** | **600** | **0.59** |
| Output | 1 | 0.00 |
| **Gradients (2x)** | **18,332** | **17.90** |
| **TOTAL** | **27,498** | **26.84** |

**CRITICAL FINDING: Dynamic PE eigendecomposition uses 7.5 GB alone!**

## Root Causes Identified

### 1. **Dynamic PE is the Primary Culprit**
- 960 eigendecompositions per batch
- Each needs CUDA workspace memory
- Not freed between timesteps
- **7.5 GB for eigendecomposition alone**

### 2. **Vectorized Processing Holds All Timesteps**
- Processing all 960 timesteps simultaneously
- Keeps all intermediate tensors in memory
- No garbage collection between timesteps

### 3. **Dual-Stream Architecture**
- 19 node streams + edge stream
- Each with 6-layer BiMamba
- All running in parallel

## Immediate Fixes (Priority Order)

### Fix 1: Disable Dynamic PE Temporarily
```yaml
# configs/local/train.yaml
graph:
  use_dynamic_pe: false  # Reduces 7.5 GB immediately
```
**Impact**: Saves 7.5 GB, loses ~1-2% AUROC

### Fix 2: Reduce Batch Size
```yaml
training:
  batch_size: 4  # Half the memory
```
**Impact**: 50% memory reduction, slower training

### Fix 3: Semi-Dynamic PE
```yaml
graph:
  semi_dynamic_interval: 10  # Update every 10 timesteps
```
**Impact**: 90% reduction in PE memory

### Fix 4: Gradient Checkpointing
```python
# In training loop
torch.utils.checkpoint.checkpoint(model.forward, x)
```
**Impact**: Trade compute for memory

### Fix 5: Process Timesteps in Chunks
```python
# Instead of all 960 at once
chunk_size = 120  # Process 120 timesteps at a time
for t in range(0, 960, chunk_size):
    x_chunk = x[:, :, t:t+chunk_size]
    out_chunk = process(x_chunk)
```

## Recommended Solution Path

### Phase 1: Immediate (Get Training Running)
1. **Set `use_dynamic_pe: false`** - Quick win
2. **Reduce batch_size to 6** - Extra safety margin
3. **Test training stability**

### Phase 2: Optimize Dynamic PE
1. **Implement chunked eigendecomposition**:
```python
def compute_dynamic_pe_chunked(self, adjacency, chunk_size=120):
    B, T, N, _ = adjacency.shape
    pe_chunks = []

    for t_start in range(0, T, chunk_size):
        t_end = min(t_start + chunk_size, T)
        adj_chunk = adjacency[:, t_start:t_end]
        pe_chunk = self._compute_pe_for_chunk(adj_chunk)
        pe_chunks.append(pe_chunk)

        # Force garbage collection
        torch.cuda.empty_cache()

    return torch.cat(pe_chunks, dim=1)
```

2. **Cache eigendecomposition results**:
```python
# Use LRU cache for repeated adjacency patterns
@lru_cache(maxsize=128)
def cached_eigendecomp(adj_hash):
    return torch.linalg.eigh(adj)
```

### Phase 3: Long-term Architecture Changes
1. **Sequential GNN processing** instead of vectorized
2. **Gradient accumulation** over timesteps
3. **Mixed precision** for non-critical ops (not eigendecomp)

## Validation Tests

1. **Memory profiling**:
```python
import torch.cuda
torch.cuda.reset_peak_memory_stats()
output = model(input)
print(f"Peak memory: {torch.cuda.max_memory_allocated() / 1e9:.2f} GB")
```

2. **Gradual batch size increase**:
```bash
# Test incrementally
for batch_size in 2 4 6 8 10 12; do
    python test_memory.py --batch_size $batch_size
done
```

## Expected Outcomes

### With Dynamic PE Disabled:
- **Memory**: 14 GB → 6.5 GB
- **Training**: Should succeed with batch_size=8
- **Performance**: -1% AUROC (acceptable)

### With Chunked Processing:
- **Memory**: Stays under 16 GB
- **Training**: 20% slower but stable
- **Performance**: Full accuracy retained

## Risk Assessment

**Without Fix:**
- 100% training failure
- Cannot run V3 architecture
- Blocks all experiments

**With Proposed Fixes:**
- Phase 1: 95% success probability, <1 hour implementation
- Phase 2: 90% success probability, 2-4 hours implementation
- Phase 3: Long-term optimization

## Recommendation

**IMMEDIATE ACTION**:
1. Disable dynamic PE in config
2. Restart training
3. Implement chunked PE processing in parallel

The OOM is primarily caused by dynamic PE's eigendecomposition memory overhead. Disabling it temporarily will unblock training while we implement a more memory-efficient version.

Commit message:

docs(test): add comprehensive test suite fix summary
- Introduced a new document summarizing fixes to the test suite, ensuring all tests now pass with improved reliability and performance.
- Addressed critical issues such as static positional encoding attribute handling and brittleness in the test suite, implementing memory-safe configurations and timeout adjustments.
- Enhanced test execution commands and configurations, promoting best practices in software engineering and clean code principles.
- Documented performance improvements, including reduced test times and stable memory usage, while outlining remaining optimization opportunities.

docs/OOM_ROOT_CAUSE_ANALYSIS.md, after:

# P0: V3 Training OOM - Root Cause Analysis

> Archived note: OOM causes and mitigations are summarized in
> `docs/08-operations/troubleshooting.md` and `docs/08-operations/performance-optimization.md`.
> See `docs/ARCHIVE_MAPPING.md`.

## Executive Summary
**CRITICAL**: V3 training fails immediately (batch 1) with OOM on RTX 4090 (24GB).
- **Memory Used**: 14.44 GB allocated + 1.74 GB reserved = 16.18 GB
- **Trying to Allocate**: 1.34 GB additional
- **Total Needed**: ~17.5 GB for forward pass alone
- **Available**: Only 5.35 GB free

## Memory Breakdown from First Principles

### Input Tensor Sizes
```
Batch size: 8
Channels: 19
Time points: 15360 (60s @ 256Hz)

Input: (8, 19, 15360) = 23,500,800 floats
       = 94 MB (float32)
```

### V3 Architecture Memory Footprint

#### 1. TCN Encoder
```
8 layers, channels [64, 128, 256, 512]
Stride down: 16x → Output: (8, 512, 960)

Memory per layer (approx):
- Layer 1: (8, 64, 15360) = 7.9 MB
- Layer 2: (8, 128, 7680) = 7.9 MB
- Layer 3: (8, 256, 3840) = 7.9 MB
- Layer 4-8: (8, 512, 960) = 3.9 MB each

TCN Total: ~47 MB activations + ~10 MB parameters
```

#### 2. Dual-Stream BiMamba (THE PROBLEM)
```
Node Stream: 19 parallel BiMambas
- Input: (8, 19, 64, 960) per electrode
- 6 layers each
- Memory: 19 × (8 × 64 × 960 × 6 layers) × 4 bytes
        = 19 × 11.8 MB = 224 MB

Edge Stream: 171 edges (19×18/2)
- Input: (8, 171, 960, 1) → projected to d_model=16
- 6 layers
- Memory: 171 × (8 × 16 × 960 × 6 layers) × 4 bytes
        = 171 × 2.9 MB = 500 MB

State-space matrices (SSMs):
- Node: 19 × 6 layers × (512 × 16 state × 2) = 1.8 MB
- Edge: 6 layers × (16 × 16 state × 2) = 0.02 MB

BiMamba Total: ~724 MB
```

#### 3. Dynamic Laplacian PE (HUGE OVERHEAD)
```
Computing eigendecomposition for EVERY timestep:
- Adjacency: (8, 960, 19, 19) = 2.8 MB
- Laplacian: (8, 960, 19, 19) = 2.8 MB
- Eigendecomposition workspace: ~10x matrix size
- Eigenvectors: (8, 960, 19, 16) = 2.3 MB

Per-timestep eigendecomposition:
- 960 timesteps × 8 batches = 7,680 eigendecompositions
- CUDA workspace per decomp: ~1 MB
- Total workspace: 7.68 GB (!!)

Dynamic PE Total: ~7.7 GB
```

#### 4. GNN Processing (Vectorized)
```
Input reshape: (8×960×19, 64) = 1,167,360 × 64
             = 299 MB

Graph operations (2 layers):
- Message passing workspace
- Adjacency matrix operations
- Intermediate activations

GNN Total: ~600 MB
```

#### 5. Output Layers
```
Final projection: (8, 1, 15360) = 0.5 MB
```

### Total Memory Analysis

| Component | Memory (MB) | Memory (GB) |
|-----------|------------|-------------|
| Input | 94 | 0.09 |
| TCN | 47 | 0.05 |
| **Dual BiMamba** | **724** | **0.71** |
| **Dynamic PE** | **7,700** | **7.50** |
| **GNN** | **600** | **0.59** |
| Output | 1 | 0.00 |
| **Gradients (2x)** | **18,332** | **17.90** |
| **TOTAL** | **27,498** | **26.84** |

**CRITICAL FINDING: Dynamic PE eigendecomposition uses 7.5 GB alone!**

## Root Causes Identified

### 1. **Dynamic PE is the Primary Culprit**
- 960 eigendecompositions per batch
- Each needs CUDA workspace memory
- Not freed between timesteps
- **7.5 GB for eigendecomposition alone**

### 2. **Vectorized Processing Holds All Timesteps**
- Processing all 960 timesteps simultaneously
- Keeps all intermediate tensors in memory
- No garbage collection between timesteps

### 3. **Dual-Stream Architecture**
- 19 node streams + edge stream
- Each with 6-layer BiMamba
- All running in parallel

## Immediate Fixes (Priority Order)

### Fix 1: Disable Dynamic PE Temporarily
```yaml
# configs/local/train.yaml
graph:
  use_dynamic_pe: false  # Reduces 7.5 GB immediately
```
**Impact**: Saves 7.5 GB, loses ~1-2% AUROC

### Fix 2: Reduce Batch Size
```yaml
training:
  batch_size: 4  # Half the memory
```
**Impact**: 50% memory reduction, slower training

### Fix 3: Semi-Dynamic PE
```yaml
graph:
  semi_dynamic_interval: 10  # Update every 10 timesteps
```
**Impact**: 90% reduction in PE memory

### Fix 4: Gradient Checkpointing
```python
# In training loop
torch.utils.checkpoint.checkpoint(model.forward, x)
```
**Impact**: Trade compute for memory

### Fix 5: Process Timesteps in Chunks
```python
# Instead of all 960 at once
chunk_size = 120  # Process 120 timesteps at a time
for t in range(0, 960, chunk_size):
    x_chunk = x[:, :, t:t+chunk_size]
    out_chunk = process(x_chunk)
```

## Recommended Solution Path

### Phase 1: Immediate (Get Training Running)
1. **Set `use_dynamic_pe: false`** - Quick win
2. **Reduce batch_size to 6** - Extra safety margin
3. **Test training stability**

### Phase 2: Optimize Dynamic PE
1. **Implement chunked eigendecomposition**:
```python
def compute_dynamic_pe_chunked(self, adjacency, chunk_size=120):
    B, T, N, _ = adjacency.shape
    pe_chunks = []

    for t_start in range(0, T, chunk_size):
        t_end = min(t_start + chunk_size, T)
        adj_chunk = adjacency[:, t_start:t_end]
        pe_chunk = self._compute_pe_for_chunk(adj_chunk)
        pe_chunks.append(pe_chunk)

        # Force garbage collection
        torch.cuda.empty_cache()

    return torch.cat(pe_chunks, dim=1)
```

2. **Cache eigendecomposition results**:
```python
# Use LRU cache for repeated adjacency patterns
@lru_cache(maxsize=128)
def cached_eigendecomp(adj_hash):
    return torch.linalg.eigh(adj)
```

### Phase 3: Long-term Architecture Changes
1. **Sequential GNN processing** instead of vectorized
2. **Gradient accumulation** over timesteps
3. **Mixed precision** for non-critical ops (not eigendecomp)

## Validation Tests

1. **Memory profiling**:
```python
import torch.cuda
torch.cuda.reset_peak_memory_stats()
output = model(input)
print(f"Peak memory: {torch.cuda.max_memory_allocated() / 1e9:.2f} GB")
```

2. **Gradual batch size increase**:
```bash
# Test incrementally
for batch_size in 2 4 6 8 10 12; do
    python test_memory.py --batch_size $batch_size
done
```

## Expected Outcomes

### With Dynamic PE Disabled:
- **Memory**: 14 GB → 6.5 GB
- **Training**: Should succeed with batch_size=8
- **Performance**: -1% AUROC (acceptable)

### With Chunked Processing:
- **Memory**: Stays under 16 GB
- **Training**: 20% slower but stable
- **Performance**: Full accuracy retained

## Risk Assessment

**Without Fix:**
- 100% training failure
- Cannot run V3 architecture
- Blocks all experiments

**With Proposed Fixes:**
- Phase 1: 95% success probability, <1 hour implementation
- Phase 2: 90% success probability, 2-4 hours implementation
- Phase 3: Long-term optimization

## Recommendation

**IMMEDIATE ACTION**:
1. Disable dynamic PE in config
2. Restart training
3. Implement chunked PE processing in parallel

The OOM is primarily caused by dynamic PE's eigendecomposition memory overhead. Disabling it temporarily will unblock training while we implement a more memory-efficient version.
