docs/V3_FINAL_IRONCLAD.md, before:

# V3.0 FINAL IRONCLAD PLAN - THE CORRECT VERSION

## What We're Building (NOT EvoBrain's Mistakes)

### Our V3 Improvements:
1. **GNN processes ALL 960 timesteps** via vectorization (not just last timestep)
2. **Static PE computed once** from structural graph (not recomputed 11,520 times)
3. **Single batched forward** over B×T graphs (not per-item loops)
4. **>30x speedup GUARANTEED** (math: 960 loops → 1 pass)

### Why EvoBrain is WRONG:
- **Last timestep only**: Throws away 959/960 = 99.9% of temporal information
- **Dynamic PE**: Eigendecomposition 11,520 times per batch = insane waste
- **Per-batch loops**: O(B×T) iterations instead of O(1) = 30-40s slowdown

## The REAL Implementation Plan

### Phase 1: Edge Pipeline ✅
```python
# edge_features.py
def pair_indices_undirected(n=19) -> list:  # 171 pairs
def edge_scalar_series(elec) -> tensor:     # cosine similarity
def assemble_adjacency(weights) -> tensor:  # top-k + threshold
```

### Phase 2: Detector V3 ✅
```python
class SeizureDetectorV3:
    # Dual streams
    node_mamba: BiMamba2(d_model=64, n_layers=6)  # Per electrode
    edge_mamba: BiMamba2(d_model=1, n_layers=2)   # Per edge pair

    # Process ALL timesteps
    gnn: GraphChannelMixerPyG(use_vectorized=True)  # NOT optional
    static_pe: buffer(19, 16)  # Computed ONCE
```

### Phase 3: GNN Vectorization ✅
```python
# Vectorized forward (DEFAULT, not optional)
x_flat = x.reshape(B*T, N, D)  # Flatten all graphs
edge_index_batch = build_disjoint_batch()  # One super-graph
out = self.gnn(x_flat, edge_index_batch)  # ONE forward pass
# NOT 960 separate forwards like EvoBrain
```

## Performance GUARANTEES (Not "Targets")

| Metric | Current | V3 | Improvement |
|--------|---------|-----|-------------|
| Forward Pass | 30-40s | <1s | **>30x** |
| Memory | 12-20GB | <8GB | **>50% reduction** |
| PE Computation | 11,520/batch | 1/epoch | **11,520x reduction** |

## Success Criteria (HARD Requirements)

- ✅ All 960 timesteps processed (not just last)
- ✅ Static PE default (not dynamic)
- ✅ Vectorized path default (not optional)
- ✅ <1s forward pass (not "target")
- ✅ No NaN/inf in 100 passes
- ✅ All 22 tests passing

## What NOT to Do (EvoBrain's Mistakes)

❌ DON'T process last timestep only
❌ DON'T use dynamic PE by default
❌ DON'T loop over batch items
❌ DON'T make vectorization "optional"
❌ DON'T aim for "parity" with broken design

## The Truth

We're not building "EvoBrain with TCN frontend."
We're building **V3: What EvoBrain SHOULD have been.**

- Better architecture (TCN > their preprocessing)
- Better batching (vectorized > loops)
- Better PE (static > dynamic)
- Better Mamba (Mamba2 > Mamba1)

## Ready to Implement

This plan is:
- ✅ Mathematically verified
- ✅ Performance guaranteed
- ✅ Test coverage complete
- ✅ Implementation detailed

**No more discussion. No more "parity." Build the BETTER system.**

Commit message:

docs: update configuration files for V3 edge stream implementation
- Revised MODAL_A100_CONSISTENCY.md to include new edge stream parameters for V3 architecture, enhancing learned adjacency capabilities.
- Updated local and modal training configurations to clarify the use of heuristic graphs and ensure consistency in comments regarding architecture options.
- Adjusted documentation in V3_FINAL_IRONCLAD.md to reflect the implemented edge stream details, including dimensionality specifications for edge Mamba layers.

docs/V3_FINAL_IRONCLAD.md, after:

# V3.0 FINAL IRONCLAD PLAN - THE CORRECT VERSION (Historical)

Note: V3 is implemented. Differences from this plan: edge stream uses `d_model=16` with `headdim=4` and a 1→D→1 projection; see docs/architecture/V3_ACTUAL.md for the ground truth.

## What We're Building (NOT EvoBrain's Mistakes)

### Our V3 Improvements:
1. **GNN processes ALL 960 timesteps** via vectorization (not just last timestep)
2. **Static PE computed once** from structural graph (not recomputed 11,520 times)
3. **Single batched forward** over B×T graphs (not per-item loops)
4. **>30x speedup GUARANTEED** (math: 960 loops → 1 pass)

### Why EvoBrain is WRONG:
- **Last timestep only**: Throws away 959/960 = 99.9% of temporal information
- **Dynamic PE**: Eigendecomposition 11,520 times per batch = insane waste
- **Per-batch loops**: O(B×T) iterations instead of O(1) = 30-40s slowdown

## The REAL Implementation Plan

### Phase 1: Edge Pipeline ✅
```python
# edge_features.py
def pair_indices_undirected(n=19) -> list:  # 171 pairs
def edge_scalar_series(elec) -> tensor:     # cosine similarity
def assemble_adjacency(weights) -> tensor:  # top-k + threshold
```

### Phase 2: Detector V3 ✅
```python
class SeizureDetectorV3:
    # Dual streams
    node_mamba: BiMamba2(d_model=64, n_layers=6)  # Per electrode
    edge_mamba: BiMamba2(d_model=1, n_layers=2)   # Per edge pair

    # Process ALL timesteps
    gnn: GraphChannelMixerPyG(use_vectorized=True)  # NOT optional
    static_pe: buffer(19, 16)  # Computed ONCE
```

### Phase 3: GNN Vectorization ✅
```python
# Vectorized forward (DEFAULT, not optional)
x_flat = x.reshape(B*T, N, D)  # Flatten all graphs
edge_index_batch = build_disjoint_batch()  # One super-graph
out = self.gnn(x_flat, edge_index_batch)  # ONE forward pass
# NOT 960 separate forwards like EvoBrain
```

## Performance GUARANTEES (Not "Targets")

| Metric | Current | V3 | Improvement |
|--------|---------|-----|-------------|
| Forward Pass | 30-40s | <1s | **>30x** |
| Memory | 12-20GB | <8GB | **>50% reduction** |
| PE Computation | 11,520/batch | 1/epoch | **11,520x reduction** |

## Success Criteria (HARD Requirements)

- ✅ All 960 timesteps processed (not just last)
- ✅ Static PE default (not dynamic)
- ✅ Vectorized path default (not optional)
- ✅ <1s forward pass (not "target")
- ✅ No NaN/inf in 100 passes
- ✅ All 22 tests passing

## What NOT to Do (EvoBrain's Mistakes)

❌ DON'T process last timestep only
❌ DON'T use dynamic PE by default
❌ DON'T loop over batch items
❌ DON'T make vectorization "optional"
❌ DON'T aim for "parity" with broken design

## The Truth

We're not building "EvoBrain with TCN frontend."
We're building **V3: What EvoBrain SHOULD have been.**

- Better architecture (TCN > their preprocessing)
- Better batching (vectorized > loops)
- Better PE (static > dynamic)
- Better Mamba (Mamba2 > Mamba1)

## Ready to Implement

This plan is:
- ✅ Mathematically verified
- ✅ Performance guaranteed
- ✅ Test coverage complete
- ✅ Implementation detailed

**No more discussion. No more "parity." Build the BETTER system.**
